1110 – School District and Board of Education Legal Status and Authority

1110 – School District and Board of Education Legal Status and Authority Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 1110 – School District and Board of Education Legal Status and Authority January 24 , 2022 The Constitution of New York State, as amended in 1894, instructs the Legislature to provide for a system of free common schools wherein all children of the State may be educated. The State Legislature has implemented this constitutional mandate through the creation of school districts of various types. The Broadalbin-Perth Central School District is governed by the laws set forth for Central School Districts in Education Law Article 37, and by laws relating to, or affecting, Union Free School Districts as set forth in Education Law Article 35 and Common School Districts as set forth in Education Law Article 33. The Broadalbin-Perth Central School District constitutes a corporate entity that possesses all the usual powers of a corporation for public purposes, and in that name may sue and be sued, purchase, hold and sell personal property and real estate, and enter into such obligations as are authorized by law. The Constitution of the State of New York places the responsibility for public education on the State Legislature, and directs the establishment of a State Department of Education for general supervision over the schools and headed by a Commissioner of Education. The New York State Constitution further provides that local public schools under the general supervision of the State Education Department shall be maintained, developed and operated by locally elected boards. Legally, local boards are instruments of the New York State Constitution, the New York Statutes and the regulations of the State Education Department and its Commissioner. Board of Education Authority As a body created under the Education Law of New York State, the Board of Education of the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District has full authority, within the limitations of federal and state laws and the Regulations of the Commissioner of Education and interpretations of them, to carry out the will of the people of its District in matters of education. In all cases where laws or regulations of the State Commissioner of Education do not provide, permit, or prohibit, the Board shall consider itself the agent responsible for establishing and appraising educational matters and activities. Board members have no authority over school affairs as individuals. They have authority only when acting as a body duly called in session. References Education Law Sections 1604, 1701, 1709, 1804, 1805, 2502, 2503 and Articles 33, 35, 37, 51 and 53 New York State Constitution section1
