1121 – Ex Officio Student Member of the Board

1121 – Ex Officio Student Member of the Board Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 1121 – Ex Officio Student Member of the Board April 10 , 2025 The Board of Education believes that it is important to include students' voices in its deliberations. Pursuant to law, the Board will designate at least one ex officio student member of the Board, with no more than two members, for the purpose of providing regular and direct communication between the Board and the student body. Ex officio student member(s) will NOT: be allowed to vote; be allowed to attend executive sessions or other meetings/hearings not open to the public; or be entitled to receive compensation of any form for participating at Board meeting. Neither will they have the authority to call a special and/or emergency meeting of the Board; be considered a "member" of the Board for the purpose of establishing a quorum for conducting business; or be allowed to see or discuss documents or information regarding individual district personnel, collective bargaining negotiations, individual student records, or any other confidential matters. Ex officio student member(s) will serve for a term of one (1) year, commencing on July 1 and ending on the succeeding June 30. Specifically, ex officio student members of the Board are expected to: Bring a student perspective to the Board's discussions; Bring student concerns to the Board's attention; Represent the student body on the Board; Report back to the student body on the Board's actions; and Solicit input from students on matters impacting the district, at the direction of the Board. To select a student ex officio member of the Board is as follows: We make it available for students who have an interest Leaderships conducts interviews with prospective candidates One or two student representatives are chosen Students are presented to the board for approval. Specifically, ex officio student members of the Board are expected to: Bring a student perspective to the Board’s discussions; Bring student concerns to the Board’s attention; Represent the student body on the Board; Report back to the student body on the Board’s actions; and Solicit input from students on matters impacting the district, at the direction of the Board. The ex officio student member represents the student body, and acts as an example for the students of the district. Such students are expected to abide by all applicable Board policies including the student Code of Conduct. Violations may result in removal from the position as determined by the Board. Ex officio student members may resign in writing to the District Clerk. The Board may also declare the seat vacant if the ex officio student member fails to attend three consecutive Board meetings without sufficient excuse.
