1410 – Policy and Administrative Regulations

1410 – Policy and Administrative Regulations Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 1410 – Policy and Administrative Regulations May 16 , 2022 The Board of Education shall reserve to itself the function of providing guides for the discretionary action of those to whom it delegates authority. The Superintendent shall act as an advisor to the Board in the adoption and approval of written Board policies. The Board shall seek input from the staff and community where appropriate. These guides for discretionary action shall constitute the policies governing the operation of the School System. The formulation and adoption of these written policies shall constitute the basic method by which the Board of Education shall exercise its leadership in the operation of the School System. The study and evaluation of reports concerning the execution of its written policies shall constitute the basic method by which the Board of Education shall exercise its control over the operation of the School System. The adoption of a written policy shall occur only after the proposal has been moved, discussed and voted on affirmatively at two (2) separate meetings of the Board of Education (i.e., the “first reading” and the “second reading”). The policy draft may be amended at the second meeting. By a majority vote, the Board may waive the “second reading” and complete the adoption of the proposed policy at its “first reading.” The formal adoption of written Board policy shall be recorded in the official minutes of the Board. Such written Board policy shall govern the conduct and affairs of the District and shall be binding upon the members of the educational community in the District. It shall be the Board’s responsibility to keep its written policies up-to-date so that they may be used consistently as a basis for Board action and administrative decision. The Superintendent is given the continuing commission of calling to the Board’s attention all policies that are out-of-date or for other reasons appear to need revision. Execution of Policy: Administrative Regulations The Board shall delegate to the Superintendent the function of specifying required actions and designing the detailed arrangements under which the schools will be operated. These rules and these detailed arrangements shall constitute the administrative regulations governing the schools. They must in every respect be consistent with the policies adopted by the Board. The Board shall be kept informed periodically of changes in administrative regulations. References Education Law Sections 1604(9), 1709(1), 1709(2) and 2503(2) section1
