1510 – Regular Board Meetings and Rules (Quorum and Parliamentary Procedure)

1510 – Regular Board Meetings and Rules (Quorum and Parliamentary Procedure) Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 1510 – Regular Board Meetings and Rules (Quorum and Parliamentary Procedure) January 27 , 2025 All Board of Education meetings must be open to the public except those portions of the meetings which qualify as executive sessions. In accordance with Section 102 of the Open Meetings Law, a “meeting” is defined as an official convening of a public body for the purpose of conducting public business, including the use of videoconferencing for attendance and participation by the members of the public body. A “public body” is defined as an entity of two (2) or more persons which requires a quorum to conduct public business, including committees and subcommittees. Reasonable efforts shall be made to ensure that all meetings are held in an appropriate facility which can adequately accommodate any and all members of the public who wish to attend. Whenever such a meeting is to take place, there must be at least seventy-two (72) hours advance notice in accordance with the provisions of the Open Meetings Law. Notice of other meetings shall be given as soon as is practicable in accordance with law. When the District has the ability to do so, notice of the time and place of a meeting shall be conspicuously posted on the District’s internet website. District records subject to release under FOIL, as well as any proposed rule, regulation, policy or amendment, that are on the Board agenda and scheduled to be discussed at a Board meeting, shall be made available on the district’s BoardDocs website ( https://go.boarddocs.com/ny/bpcsd/Board.nsf ) or upon request, to the extent practicable, prior to the meeting. Paper copies of such records may be made available for a reasonable fee. The District may, but it is not required to expend additional funds to provide such records. If videoconferencing or online technology is used to conduct a meeting, the public notice for the meeting shall inform the public that videoconferencing will be used, identify all the locations for the meeting, and state that the public has the right to attend the meeting at any of the locations. Member voting may be done through videoconferencing, provided that members can be both seen and heard voting and participating from remote locations. Regular meetings of the Board of Education of Broadalbin-Perth Central School District shall take place on the day and time designated by the Board at the Annual Organizational Meeting, except as modified at subsequent meetings of the Board. The Superintendent is responsible for preparing the agenda and reviewing it with the Board President before each Board meeting. Agendas are prepared the week prior and posted on BoardDocs by the Friday before regular meetings. Requests from Board members to add items to the agenda should be directed to the Superintendent. Individuals or groups must submit written requests to the Superintendent, who will present them to the Board. All agenda items must be submitted to the Superintendent’s office by 3 p.m. on the Wednesday before the meeting. If a meeting date falls on a legal holiday, conflicts with other area meetings, or lacks a quorum, the Board will choose a new date at a prior regular meeting and direct the Clerk to notify all members. Any meeting of the Board may be adjourned to a future date and hour if voted by a majority of the Board present. The Superintendent and members of his/her staff at the Superintendent’s discretion shall attend all meetings of the Board. The Superintendent shall attend all executive session meetings of the Board except those that concern his/her evaluation, employment status, and salary determination. The Board may request the attendance of such additional persons as it desires. Recording of Meetings The Board supports the use of technology to photograph, broadcast, webcast, or record public meetings non-disruptively, facilitating open communication. It may establish rules for equipment and personnel placement to ensure orderly proceedings. If such rules are established, they will be posted during meetings and provided in writing upon request. Public Expression at Meetings The Board encourages public expression during meetings and allocates a portion of the agenda for public comment. Speakers are given five (5) minutes each and are encouraged to sign up in advance with the District Clerk or at the meeting. To maintain order and efficiency, public participation is limited to a reasonable time. For complex matters, the Board may request written submissions or schedule a special meeting. The Board prohibits discussion of specific personnel or student matters, interruptions, slander, or name-calling. Questions may be addressed at the Board's discretion or referred to the appropriate administrator. The Board President may extend speaking time when warranted. At its discretion, the Board may invite visitors to its meetings to participate in the Board’s discussion of matters on the agenda. The Board of Education reserves the right to enter into executive session as specified in Policy #1540 — Executive Sessions. Quorum The quorum for any meeting of the Board shall be four (4) members. No formal action shall be taken at any meeting at which a quorum is not present. When only a quorum exists, the Board shall act by unanimous vote unless otherwise required by the laws of the State of New York. Use of Parliamentary Procedure The business of the Board of Education shall be conducted in accordance with administrative regulation 1510R Rules of Order. References Education Law Sections 1708 and 2504 Public Officers Law Article 7, Sections 103(d), 104 and 107 NOTE: Refer also to Policies: #1520 — Special Meetings of the Board of Education #1510R — Rules of Order #1540 — Executive Sessions section1
