1530 – Minutes

1530 – Minutes Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 1530 – Minutes June 8 , 2023 The minutes are a legal record of the activities of the School Board as a public corporation having the specified legal purpose of maintaining public schools. The minutes of all meetings shall be kept by the Clerk or, in his/her absence, by the Superintendent or his/her designee. The minutes shall be complete and accurate, stored in a minutes file and posted on the District website. However, minutes of executive sessions need not include any matter which is not required to be made public by the Freedom of Information Law. The minutes of each meeting of the Board of Education shall state: The type of meeting; The date, time of convening, and adjournment; Board members present and absent; Board members’ arrival and departure time, if different from opening or adjournment times; All action taken by the Board, including a record or summary of all motions, proposals, resolutions, and other matters formally voted upon, with evidence of those voting in the affirmative and the negative, and those abstaining. Communications and other documents that are too long and bulky to be included in the minutes shall be referred to in the minutes, shall be filed in the District Office and shall be attached to the minutes online. All Board minutes shall be signed by the District Clerk when approved and stored in a locked room or locked file cabinet. Unless otherwise provided by law, minutes shall be available to the public within two (2) weeks following the date of a meeting; draft copies, so marked, are acceptable, subject to correction. Minutes of Executive Sessions Minutes shall be taken at executive sessions of any action that is taken by formal vote. The minutes shall consist of a record or summary of the final determination of such action, the date and the vote. However, such summary need not include any matter which is not required to be made public by the Freedom of Information Law (FOIL). If action is taken by a formal vote in executive session (i.e., 3020-a action), minutes shall be available to the public within one (1) week of the date of the executive session. References Education Law Sections 2121 and 3020-a Public Officers Law Sections 103 and 106 section1
