2320 – Attendance by Board Members at Conferences, Conventions and Workshops

2320 – Attendance by Board Members at Conferences, Conventions and Workshops Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 2320 – Attendance by Board Members at Conferences, Conventions and Workshops December 2 , 2025 The Board believes that continuing in-service training and development are important for its members. The Board, therefore, encourages the participation of all members at appropriate school board conferences, conventions and workshops which are believed to be of benefit to the School District. However, in order to control both the investment of time and funds necessary to implement this policy, the Board establishes the following guidelines: A calendar of school board conferences, conventions and workshops shall be maintained by the Board Clerk. The Board will periodically decide which meetings appear to be most likely to produce direct and indirect benefits to the School District. At least annually, the Board will identify those new ideas or procedures and/or cost benefits that can be ascribed to participation at such meetings. Funds for participation at such conferences, conventions, workshops and the like will be budgeted for on an annual basis. When funds are limited, the Board will designate which members are to participate at a given meeting. Reimbursement to Board members for all actual and necessary registration fees, expenses of travel, meals and lodging, and all necessary tuition fees incurred in connection with attendance at conferences and the like will be in accordance with established regulations for expense reimbursement. When a conference, convention or workshop is not attended by the full Board, those who do participate will be requested to share information, recommendations and materials acquired at the meeting. The authorization for Board members to attend a conference, convention, workshop and the like shall be by Board resolution adopted prior to such attendance. However, the Board, in its discretion, may delegate the power to authorize attendance at such conferences to the President of the Board of Education. Where authorization has been delegated to the President of the Board, no expense or claim form shall be paid unless a travel order or similar document signed by the President is attached to such form, authorizing the claimant to attend the conference. References Education Law Section 2118 General Municipal Law Sections 77-b and 77-c NOTE: Refer also to Policies: #5323 — Reimbursement for Meals/Refreshments #6161 — Conference/Travel Expense Reimbursement section2
