3310 – Public Access to Records

3310 – Public Access to Records Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 3310 – Public Access to Records January 27 , 2025 Access to records of the District shall be consistent with the rules and regulations established by the State Committee on Open Government and shall comply with all the requirements of the New York State Public Officers Law Sections 87 and 89. A Records Access Officer shall be designated by the Superintendent, subject to the approval of the Board of Education, who shall have the duty of coordinating the School District’s response to public request for access to records. The District shall provide copies of records in the format and on the medium requested by the person filing the Freedom of Information Law (FOIL) request if the District can reasonably do so regardless of burden, volume or cost of the request. Regulations and procedures pertaining to accessing and providing District records shall be as indicated in the School District Administrative Manual. Requests for Records via Email If the District has the capability to retrieve electronic records, it must provide such records electronically upon request. The District shall accept requests for records submitted in the form of electronic mail and respond to such requests by electronic mail using the forms supplied by the District. This information shall be posted on the District website, clearly designating the email address for purposes of receiving requests for records via this format. When the District maintains requested records electronically, the response shall inform the requester that the records are accessible via the internet and in printed form either on paper or other information storage medium. Board of Education Meetings and Records District records subject to release under the FOIL, as well as any proposed rule, regulation, policy or amendment, that are on the Board agenda and scheduled to be discussed at a Board meeting, shall be made available upon request, to the extent practicable, prior to the meeting. Copies of such records may be made available for a reasonable fee. If the District maintains a regularly updated website and utilizes a high speed internet connection, such records shall be posted on the website to the extent practicable, prior to the meeting. The District may, but is not required to expend additional funds to provide such records. References Education Law Section 2116 Public Officers Law Sections 87 and 89 21 NYCRR Parts 1401 and 9760
