3410/7100 – Code of Conduct, Part 2

3410/7100 – Code of Conduct, Part 2 Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 3410/7100 – Code of Conduct, Part 2 September 15 , 2025 Click here to see part 1 of the Code of Conduct XII. Discipline of Students with Disabilities The board recognizes that it may be necessary to suspend, remove or otherwise discipline students with disabilities to address disruptive or problem behavior. The board also recognizes that students with disabilities enjoy certain procedural protections whenever school authorities intend to impose discipline upon them. The board is committed to ensuring that the procedures followed for suspending, removing or otherwise disciplining students with disabilities are consistent with the procedural safeguards required by applicable laws and regulations. This code of conduct affords students with disabilities subject to disciplinary action no greater or lesser rights than those expressly afforded by applicable federal and state law and regulations. A. Authorized Suspensions or Removals of Students with Disabilities For this section of the code of conduct, the following definitions apply. A “suspension” means a suspension under Education Law §3214. A “removal” means a removal for disciplinary reasons from the student’s current educational placement other than a suspension and change in placement to an interim alternative educational setting (IAES) ordered by an impartial hearing officer because the student poses a risk of harm to himself or herself or others. An “IAES” means a temporary educational placement for a period of up to 45 days, other than the student’s current placement at the time the behavior precipitating the IAES placement occurred, that enables the student to continue to progress in the general curriculum, although in another setting, to continue to receive those services and modifications, including those described on the student’s current individualized education program (IEP), that will enable the student to meet the goals set out in such IEP and include services and modifications to address the behavior which precipitated the IAES placement that are designed to prevent the behavior from recurring. School personnel may order the suspension or removal of a student with a disability from his or her current educational placement as follows: The board, the district (BOCES) superintendent of schools or a building principal may order the placement of a student with disabilities into an IAES, another setting or suspension for a period not to exceed five consecutive school days and not to exceed the amount of time a non-disabled student would be subject to suspension for the same behavior. The superintendent may order the placement of a student with a disability into an IAES, another setting or suspension for up to 10 consecutive school days, inclusive of any period in which the student has been suspended or removed under subparagraph (a) above for the same behavior if the superintendent determines that the student has engaged in behavior that warrants a suspension and the suspension or removal does not exceed the amount of time non-disabled students would be subject to suspension for the same behavior. The superintendent may order additional suspensions of not more than 10 consecutive school days in the same school year for separate incidents of misconduct, as long as those removals do not constitute a change of placement. The superintendent may order the placement of a student with a disability in an IAES to be determined by the committee on special education (CSE), for the same amount of time that a student without a disability would be subject to discipline, but not more than 45 days, if the student carries or possesses a weapon to school or to a school function, or the student knowingly possesses or uses illegal drugs or sells or solicits the sale of a controlled substance while at school or a school function. “weapons” means the same as “dangerous weapon” under 18 U.S.C. S 930 (g) (w) which includes “ a weapon, device, instrument, material or substance, animate or inanimate, that is used for, or is readily capable of causing death or serious bodily injury, except…(for) a pocket knife with a blade of less than 2 ½ inches in length. “controlled substance” means a drug or other substance identified in certain provisions of the federal Controlled Substances Act specified in both federal and state law and regulations applicable to this policy. “Illegal drugs” means a controlled substance except for those legally possessed or used under the supervision of a licensed health-care professional or that is legally possessed or used under any other authority under the Controlled Substances Act or any other federal law. Subject to specified conditions required by both federal and state law and regulations, an impartial hearing officer may order the placement of a student with a disability in an IAES setting for up to 45 days at a time, if maintaining the student in his or her current educational placement poses a risk of harm to the student or others. B. Change of Placement Rule A disciplinary change in placement means a suspension or removal from a student’s current educational placement that is either: for more than 10 consecutive school days; or for a period of 10 consecutive days or less if the student is subjected to a series of suspensions or removals that constitute a pattern because they cumulate to more than 10 school days in a school year and because of such factors as the length of each suspension or removal, the total amount of time the student is removed and the proximity of the suspensions or removals to one another. School personnel may not suspend or remove a student with disabilities if imposition of the suspension or removal would result in a disciplinary charge in placement based on a pattern of suspension or removal. However, the district may impose a suspension or removal, which would otherwise result in a disciplinary change in placement, based on a pattern of suspension or removals if the CSE has determined that the behavior was not a manifestation of the student’s disability, or the student is placed in an IAES for behavior involving weapons, illegal drugs or controlled substances. C. Special Rules Regarding the Suspension or Removal of Students with Disabilities The district’s Committee on Special Education shall: Conduct functional behavioral assessments to determine why a student engages in a particular behavior, and develop or review behavioral intervention plans whenever the district is first suspending or removing a student with a disability for more than 10 school days in a school year or imposing a suspension or removal that constitutes a disciplinary change in placement, including a change in placement to an IAES for misconduct involving weapons, illegal drugs or controlled substances. If subsequently, a student with a disability who has a behavioral intervention plan and who has been suspended or removed from his or her current educational placement for more than 10 school days in a school year is subjected to suspension or removal that does not constitute a disciplinary change in placement, the members of the CSE shall review the behavioral intervention plan and its implementation to determine if modifications are necessary. If one or more members of the CSE believe that modifications are needed, the school district shall convene a meeting of the CSE to modify such plan and its implementation, to the extent the committee determines necessary. Conduct a manifestation determination review of the relationship between the student’s disability and the behavior subject to disciplinary action whenever a decision is made to place a student in an IAES either for misconduct involving weapons, illegal drugs or controlled substances or because maintaining the student in his current educational setting poses a risk of harm to the student or others; or a decision is made to impose a suspension that constitutes a disciplinary change in placement. The parents of a student who is facing disciplinary action, but who has not been determined to be eligible for services under IDEA and Article 89 at the time of the misconduct, shall have the right to invoke applicable procedural safeguards set forth in federal and state law and regulations if, in accordance with federal and state statutory and regulatory criteria, the school district is deemed to have had the knowledge that their child was a student with a disability before the behavior precipitating disciplinary action occurred. If the district is deemed to have had such knowledge, the student will be considered a student presumed to have a disability for discipline purposes. The superintendent, building principal or other school official imposing a suspension or removal shall be responsible for determining whether the student is a student presumed to have a disability. A student will not be considered a student presumed to have a disability for discipline purposes if, upon receipt of information supporting a claim that the district had knowledge the student was a student with a disability, the district either: conducted an individual evaluation and determined that the student is not a student with a disability, or determined that an evaluation was not necessary and provided notice to the parents of such determination, in the manner required by applicable law and regulations. If there is no basis for knowledge that the student is a student with a disability prior to taking disciplinary measures against the student, the student may be subjected to the same disciplinary measures as any other non-disabled student who engaged in comparable behavior. However, if a request for an individual evaluation is made while such non-disabled student is subjected to a disciplinary removal, an expedited evaluation shall be conducted and completed in the manner prescribed by applicable federal and state law and regulations. Until the expedited evaluation is completed, the non-disabled student who is not a student presumed to have a disability for discipline purposes shall remain in the educational placement determined by the district, which can include suspension. The district shall provide parents with notice of disciplinary removal no later than the date on which a decision is made to change the placement of a student with a disability to an IAES for either misconduct involving weapons, illegal drugs or controlled substances or because maintaining the student in his/her current educational setting poses a risk of harm to the student or others; or a decision is made to impose a suspension or removal that constitutes a disciplinary change in placement. The procedural safeguards notice prescribed by the Commissioner shall accompany the notice of disciplinary removal. The parents of a student with disabilities subject to a suspension of five consecutive school days or less shall be provided with the same opportunity for an informal conference available to parents of non-disabled students under the Education Law. Superintendent hearings on disciplinary charges against students with disabilities subject to a suspension of more than five school days shall be bifurcated into a guilt phase and a penalty phase in accordance with the procedures set forth in the commissioner’s regulations incorporated into this code. The removal of a student with disabilities other than a suspension or placement in an IAES shall be conducted in accordance with the due process procedures applicable to such removals of non-disabled students, except that school personnel may not impose such removal for more than 10 consecutive days or for a period that would result in a 25 disciplinary change in placement, unless the CSE has determined that the behavior is not a manifestation of the students disability. During any period of suspension or removal, including placement in an IAES, students with disabilities shall be provided services as required by the Commissioner’s regulations incorporated into this code. D. Expedited Due Process Hearings An expedited due process hearing shall be conducted in the manner specified by the Commissioner’s regulations incorporated into this code if: The district requests such a hearing to obtain an order of an impartial hearing officer placing a student with a disability in an IAES where school personnel maintain that it is dangerous for the student to be in his or her current educational placement, or during the pendency of due process hearings where school personnel maintain that it is dangerous for the student to be in his or her current educational placement during such proceedings. The parents request such a hearing from a determination that the student’s behavior was not a manifestation of the student’s disability, or relating to any decision regarding placement, including but not limited to any decision to place the student in an IAES. During the pendency of an expedited due process hearing or appeal regarding the placement of a student in an IAES for behavior involving weapons, illegal drugs or controlled substances, or on grounds of dangerousness, or regarding a determination that the behavior is not a manifestation of the student's disability for a student who has been placed in an IAES, the student shall remain in an IAES, the student shall remain in the IAES pending the decision of the impartial hearing officer or until expiration of the IAES placement, whichever occurs first, unless the parents and the district agree otherwise. If school personnel propose to change the student’s placement after expiration of an IAES placement, during the pendency of any proceeding to challenge the proposed change in placement, the student shall remain in the placement prior to the removal to the IAES, except where the student is again placed in an IAES. E. Referral to law enforcement and judicial authorities. In accordance with the provisions of IDEA and its implementing regulations: The district may report a crime committed by a child with a disability to appropriate authorities, and such action will not constitute a change of the student’s placement. The superintendent shall ensure that copies of the special education and disciplinary records of a student with disabilities are transmitted for consideration to the appropriate authorities to whom a crime is reported. XIII. Student Searches and Interrogations (Board Policy 7330) The Board of Education is committed to ensuring an atmosphere on school property and at school functions that is safe and orderly. To achieve this environment, any school official authorized to impose a disciplinary penalty may question a student about an alleged violation of law or the District Code of Conduct. Students are not entitled to “Miranda” warnings before being questioned by school officials, nor are school officials required to contact a student’s parent before questioning the student; however, school officials will inform students of the reason for questioning. Searches based on reasonable suspicion. The Superintendent and building principals are authorized to conduct searches of students and their belongings when there is reasonable suspicion that the search will yield evidence that the student violated the law or the Code. Searches will be no broader than necessary to locate the evidence sought, and, whenever practicable, will be conducted privately with the student present. Minimal, non-intrusive inspections (e.g., touching the outside of a bag) may occur without reasonable suspicion when there is a legitimate safety reason. Reliable information from staff or credible third parties may establish reasonable suspicion. Vehicles on school property. The principal or designee may search a student vehicle on school property where there are reasonable grounds to suspect possession or use of prohibited substances or items. Lockers, desks, and school storage. Students have no reasonable expectation of privacy in school-provided storage. Such areas may be searched at any time without notice or consent. Documentation. The official conducting any search will promptly document: student name/age/grade; reasons and purpose; informant(s), if any; time/place; scope; personnel/witnesses; results; disposition of items; and parent notification. Confiscated illegal or dangerous items will be labeled and secured until turned over to law enforcement. Police involvement. Law enforcement (including K-9 units) may enter school property to question/search students or conduct investigations if they have a warrant, probable cause a crime occurred on school property, or an invitation from school officials. Prior to any questioning/search by police, the principal/designee will make reasonable efforts to notify parents so they may be present; if a parent cannot be reached, the questioning/search will not proceed for students under 16. Students 16 or older may be questioned without parent presence. The principal/designee will be present during any police questioning/search on school property, and students retain their legal rights (to be informed of rights, to remain silent, and to request counsel). Child Protective Services (CPS). The District will cooperate with CPS interviews on campus related to suspected abuse/neglect/custody. Requests must go to the principal/designee, who will set time/place and be present. If verification of injuries requires clothing removal, a school nurse or medical staff of the same sex will be present for that portion. CPS may remove a student without a court order only where the worker reasonably believes the student would be in danger if not removed immediately, following confirmation with a DSS supervisor. XIV. Hazing of Students (Board Policy 7553) The Board of Education is committed to providing a safe, productive and positive learning environment within its schools. Hazing activities are demeaning, abusive and/or illegal behaviors that harm victims, and are inconsistent with the educational goals of the District by negatively impacting the school environment. Hazing of a student by another student or group of students is strictly prohibited on school property; in school buildings; on school buses; by school sponsored groups, clubs or teams; and at school sponsored events and/or activities whether occurring on or off-campus. Hazing of a student refers to soliciting, encouraging, aiding, or engaging in "hazing" behavior as defined pursuant to District policy, regulation and/or law. The Board of Education shall require the prohibition of hazing - along with the range of possible intervention activities and/or sanctions for such misconduct - to be included in the District Code of Conduct for all grade levels. For purposes of this policy, the term "hazing" among students is defined as any humiliating or dangerous activity expected of a student to join a group, regardless of their willingness to participate. Hazing behaviors include, but are not limited to, the following general categories: Humiliation: socially offensive, isolating or uncooperative behaviors. Substance abuse: abuse of tobacco, alcohol or illegal drugs. Dangerous hazing: hurtful, aggressive, destructive, and disruptive behaviors. Incorporated within this definition are various forms of physical, emotional and/or sexual abuse which may range in severity from teasing/embarrassing activities to life threatening actions. Even if the hazing victim participated "willingly" in the activity, or there was no "intent" by the hazer to harm or injure another individual, hazing is still hazing and against District policy, the District Code of Conduct and may be in violation of New York State Law. However, hazing of students does not need to rise to the level of criminal activity for such conduct to be in violation of District rules and subject to appropriate disciplinary sanctions. Any hazing activity, whether by an individual or a group, shall be presumed a forced activity and in violation of Board policy, regardless of the "willingness" of the student to participate. Any student who believes that he/she is being subjected to hazing behavior, as well as students, school employees or third parties who have knowledge of or witness any possible occurrence of hazing, shall report the incident to any staff member or the Building Principal. Anonymous student complaints of hazing behavior will also be investigated by the District. The staff member/Building Principal to whom the report is made (or the staff member/Building Principal who witnesses hazing behavior) shall investigate the complaint/incident and take appropriate action to include, as necessary, referral to the next level of supervisory authority and/or other official designated by the District to investigate allegations of hazing. Investigations of allegations of hazing shall follow the procedures utilized for complaints of harassment within the School District. Allegations of hazing shall be promptly investigated and will be treated as confidential and private to the extent possible within legal constraints. Prohibition of Retaliatory Behavior (Commonly Known as "Whistle Blower" Protection) The Board of Education prohibits any retaliatory behavior directed against complainants, victims, witnesses, and/or any other individuals who participate in the investigation of allegations of hazing. Follow-up inquiries and/or appropriate monitoring of the alleged hazer(s) and victim(s) shall be made to ensure that hazing behavior has not resumed and that all those involved in the investigation of allegations of hazing have not suffered retaliation. Any act of retaliation is subject to appropriate disciplinary action by the District. Knowingly Makes False Accusations Students who knowingly make false accusations against another individual as to allegations of hazing may also face appropriate disciplinary action. District Responsibility/Training Personnel at all levels are responsible for taking corrective action to prevent hazing behavior of which they have been made aware at School District sites; by school sponsored groups, clubs or teams; and at school sponsored events and/or activities whether occurring on or off-campus. Further, as may be applicable, personnel are to report such hazing behavior to their immediate supervisor. Staff training shall be provided to raise awareness of the problem of hazing within the schools and to facilitate staff identification of, and response to, such hazing behavior among students. Prevention and intervention techniques within the District to help prevent hazing behavior and to support and protect victims shall include building-level and classroom-level strategies and activities as determined by administration. Individual intervention will be provided by appropriate staff members to hazers, victims and their parents to help ensure that the hazing stops. Rules against hazing shall be publicized District-wide and shall be disseminated as appropriate to staff, students and parents. Disciplinary sanctions for violation of this policy shall be outlined in the District Code of Conduct and may also be incorporated in staff and student handbooks. In addition, allegations of hazing behavior may result in referral to law enforcement officials as necessary. XV. Alcohol, Tobacco, Drugs, and Other Substances (Board Policy 7320) The Board recognizes that the misuse of alcohol, drugs, tobacco, and other illegal substances is a serious problem with legal, physical, emotional, and social implications for our students, as well as the entire community. Therefore, the consumption, sharing and/or selling, use and/or possession of alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, illegal drugs, counterfeit and designer drugs, or paraphernalia for the use of such drugs is prohibited at any school sponsored function, on school grounds, and on school buses at all times. The unauthorized use of prescription and over-the-counter drugs is also prohibited. Students will not be under the influence of alcohol or other prohibited substances on school grounds or at school sponsored events. A school sponsored function includes a school sponsored or school-authorized extracurricular event or activity regardless of where the event or activity takes place. Smoking Smoking will not be permitted and no person will smoke within 100 feet of the entrance, exits, or outdoor areas of any public or private elementary or secondary schools. However, this does not apply to smoking in a residence, or within the real property boundary lines of residential real property. Non-Medical Use of Prescription Drugs Non-medical use of prescription drugs is prohibited. Should a student be found in possession of any such substance, he or she will be disciplined in accordance with the District Code of Conduct. Disciplinary Measures Disciplinary measures for students consuming, sharing and/or selling, using and/or possessing alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, illegal drugs, counterfeit and designer drugs, or paraphernalia for the use of these drugs will be outlined in the District Code of Conduct. XVI. Weapons in School and the Gun-Free Schools Act (Board Policy 7360) With the exception of those students who receive prior written permission from the Board of Education or its designee, no student may bring in or possess any “firearm” or “weapon” on school property, on a school bus or District vehicle, in school buildings, or at school sponsored activities or settings under the control or supervision of the District regardless of location. Any student who has been found guilty of bringing in or possessing a firearm or weapon in violation of this policy will be disciplined in a manner consistent with State and Federal law and the District’s Code of Conduct. Such discipline may include a mandatory suspension for a period of not less than one (1) calendar year for a student who is determined to have violated the Federal Gun-Free Schools Act and its implementing provisions in the New York State Education Law, provided that the Superintendent may modify the suspension requirement on a case-by-case basis. Students who have brought a “weapon” or “firearm” to school will be referred by the Superintendent to either a presentment agency (the agency or authority responsible for presenting a juvenile delinquency proceeding) or to appropriate law enforcement officials. Such referrals will be made as follows: a student who is under the age of sixteen (16) and who is not a fourteen (14) or fifteen (15) year-old who qualifies for juvenile offender status under the Criminal Procedure Law will be referred to a presentment agency for juvenile delinquency proceedings; a student who is sixteen (16) years old or older, or who is fourteen (14) or fifteen (15) and qualifies for juvenile offender status, will be referred to the appropriate law enforcement authorities. For the purposes of this policy, the term “weapon” will be as defined in 18 USC 930(g)(2). For the purposes of this policy, the term “firearm” will be as defined in 18 USC 921(a). Students with disabilities continue to be entitled to all rights enumerated in the Individuals with Disabilities Act and Education Law Article 89. This policy shall not be deemed to authorize suspension of students with disabilities in violation of those authorities. This policy does not diminish the authority of the Board of Education to offer courses in instruction in the safe use of firearms pursuant to Education Law Section 809-a. XVII. Visitors to the Schools The board encourages parents and other district citizens to visit the district’s schools and classrooms to observe the work of students, teachers and other staff. Since schools are a place of work and learning, however, certain limits must be set for such visits. The building principal or his or her designee is responsible for all persons in the building and on the grounds. For these reasons, the following rules apply to visitors to the school: Anyone who is not a regular staff member or student of the school will be considered a visitor. All visitors to the school are to report to the office of the principal upon arrival at the school. There they will be required to sign the visitor’s register and will be issued a visitor’s identification badge, which must be worn at all times while in the school or on school grounds. The visitor must return the identification badge to the principal’s office before leaving the building. Visitors attending school functions that are open to the public, such as parent-teacher organization meetings or public gatherings, are not required to register. Parents or citizens who wish to observe a classroom while school is in session are required to arrange such visits in advance with the building principal and classroom teacher(s), so that class disruption is kept to a minimum. Teachers are expected not to take class time to discuss individual matters with the visitor. Any unauthorized person on school property will be reported to the principal or his or her designee. Unauthorized persons will be asked to leave. The police may be called if the situation warrants. All visitors are expected to abide by the rules for public conduct on school property contained in this code of conduct. XVIII. Public Conduct On School Property The Board of Education recognizes that the primary purpose of the school district is to provide a superior atmosphere for learning and education. Any action by an individual or groups aimed at disrupting, interfering with or delaying the education process or having such effect, is hereby declared to be in violation of Board policy. The Board shall approve rules and regulations to affect this policy as required by Education Law Section §2801. The Board also recognizes its responsibility to protect school property and declares its intent to take any and all legal action to prevent its damage or destruction. The Board will also seek restitution from, and prosecution of, any person or persons who willfully damage school property. It is not the intent of this policy to limit freedom of speech or peaceful assembly. The Board recognizes that free inquiry and free expression are indispensable to the objectives of a school district. The purpose of the rules and regulations is to prevent abuse of the rights of others and to maintain public order, not to prevent or restrain controversy or dissent. Public Conduct on School Property Regulation These rules govern the conduct of students, faculty and other staff, licensees, invitees, and all other persons, whether or not their presence is authorized, upon district property, and also upon or with respect to any other premises or property under the control of the district and used in its teaching programs, and activities, and in its administrative, cultural, recreational, athletic, and other programs and activities. Prohibited Conduct No person, either singly or in concert with others, shall: Willfully cause physical injury to any other person nor threaten to do so, for the purpose of compelling or inducing such other person to refrain from any act which he/she has a lawful right to do, or to do any act which he/she has a lawful right not to do; Physically restrain or detain any other person, nor remove such person from any place where he/she is authorized to remain, except that students may be restrained as permitted under Policy 7350, Corporal Punishment Policy; Willfully damage or destroy property of the district or property under its jurisdiction, nor remove or use such property without authorization; Without permission, expressed or implied, enter into any private office of an administrative officer, member of the faculty or staff member; Enter upon and remain in any building or facility for any purpose other than its authorized uses or in such manner as to obstruct its authorized use by others; Without authorization, remain in any building or facility after it is normally closed; Refuse to leave any building or facility after being required to do so by an authorized administrative officer, member of the faculty or staff member; Obstruct the free movement of persons and vehicles in any place to which there rules apply; Deliberately disrupt or prevent the peaceful and orderly conduct of classes, lectures and meetings of deliberately interfere with the freedom of any person to express his/her views, including invited speakers; Knowingly have in his/her possession upon any premises to which these rules apply, any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver, or other firearm or weapon, dangerous chemicals, explosives or any object which is not necessary for school activities and which could be used as a weapon, without the written authorization of the Superintendent of Schools, whether or not a license to possess the same has been issued to such person; Willfully incite others to commit any of the acts herein prohibited with specific intent to procure them to do so; and/or Intimidate, harass or discriminate against any person on the basis of actual or perceived race, color, creed, national origin, religion or religious practices, age, gender, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation or disability on school grounds or at a school function. This statement of behavior is not conclusive nor limited to other prohibited conduct found in policy handbook of conduct. Section II rules are in effect at all times. Penalties and Procedures A person who violates any of the provisions of these rules shall be subject to the following penalties and procedures: If a licensee or invitee, his/her authorization to remain upon the grounds or other property shall be withdrawn and he/she shall be directed to leave the premises. In the event of failure to do so, he/she shall be subject to ejection. If a trespasser or visitor without specific license or invitation, he/she shall be subject to ejection. If he/she is a student, he/she shall be subject to disciplinary action as the facts of the case may warrant, including suspension, probation, loss of privileges, reprimand or warning as prescribed by section §3214 of the Education Law and he/she shall be subject to ejection. If a tenured faculty member, he/she shall be subject to ejection, warning, reprimand, suspension and/or other disciplinary action as prescribed by and in accordance with 3020-a of the Education Law. If a staff member in the classified service of the civil service, he/she shall be Subject to the penalties and procedures prescribed in section 75 of the Civil Service Law and be subject to ejection. If a staff member other than one described in subdivisions 4 and 5, he/she be Subject to dismissal, suspension without pay or censure and be subject to ejection. Other penalties as prescribed by law and/or policy shall apply. Enforcement Program The Superintendent of Schools shall be responsible for the enforcement of these rules, and he/she shall designate the other personnel who are authorized to take action in accordance with such rules when required or appropriate to carry them into effect. In the case of any apparent violation of these rules by such persons, which, in the judgment of the Superintendent or his/her designee, does not pose any immediate threat of injury to person or the property, such school official may make reasonable effort to learn the cause of the conduct in question and to persuade those engaged therein to desist and to resort to permissible methods for the school official shall warn such persons of the consequences of persistence in the prohibited conduct, including their ejection from any district properties where their continued presence and conduct is in violation of these rules. In any case where violation of these rules does not cease after such warning and in other cases of willful violation of such rules, the Superintendent or his/her designee shall cause the ejection of the violator from any premises which he/she occupies in such violation and/or, if appropriate, make recourse to police authorities. The school official may also initiate disciplinary action as hereinbefore provided. The Superintendent or his/her designee may apply to the public authorities for any aid which he/she deems necessary in causing the ejection of any violator of these rules and he/she may request the Board’s Counsel to apply to any court of appropriate jurisdiction for any injunction to restrain the violation or threatened violation of such rules. XIX. Corporal Punishment No teacher, administrator, officer, employee, or agent of the Broadalbin-Perth Central School shall use Corporal Punishment against a pupil. Corporal Punishment is prohibited in the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District. The term Corporal Punishment shall mean any act of physical force upon a pupil for the purpose of punishing that pupil. Corporal Punishment shall not mean the use of reasonable physical force for any of the following purposes: to protect oneself from physical injury; to protect another pupil or teacher or any other person from physical injury. to protect the property of the school or of others; or Corporal punishment shall not mean the use of reasonable physical contact to restrain a pupil from leaving the immediate area where he is receiving directions, counsel or a reprimand Reporting Process any complaint about the use of corporal punishment by a staff member is to be reported in writing to the Superintendent. the Superintendent or his designee will investigate the complaint. where a violation of the district’s corporal punishment policy is found, the Superintendent will take appropriate disciplinary action. A report of the resolution of the complaint will be sent to the complainant and the Board of Education. A file of the complaint and its resolution will be kept in the district’s office. XX. Suspension of Students (Board Policy 7313) Five (5) School Days or Less The Superintendent and/or the Principal of the school where the student attends shall have the power to suspend a student for a period not to exceed five (5) school days. In the absence of the Principal, the designated “Acting Principal” may then suspend a student for a period of five (5) school days or less. When the Superintendent or the Principal (the “suspending authority”) proposes to suspend a student for five (5) school days or less, the suspending authority shall provide the student with notice of the charged misconduct. If the student denies the misconduct, the suspending authority shall provide an explanation of the basis for the suspension. When suspension of a student for a period of five (5) school days or less is proposed, administration shall also immediately notify the parent/person in parental relation in writing that the student may be suspended from school. Written notice shall be provided by personal delivery, express mail delivery, or equivalent means reasonably calculated to assure receipt of such notice within twenty-four (24) hours of the decision to propose suspension at the last known address or addresses of the parents/persons in parental relation. Where possible, notification shall also be provided by telephone if the school has been provided with a telephone number(s) for the purpose of contacting parents/persons in parental relation. The notice shall provide a description of the incident(s) for which suspension is proposed and shall inform the student and the parent/person in parental relation of their right to request an immediate informal conference with the Principal in accordance with the provisions of Education Law Section 3214(3)(b). Both the notice and the informal conference shall be in the dominant language or mode of communication used by the parents/persons in parental relation. At the informal conference, the student and the parent/person in parental relation shall be authorized to present the student’s version of the event and to ask questions of the complaining witnesses. The notice and opportunity for informal conference shall take place prior to suspension of the student unless the student’s presence in the school poses a continuing danger to persons or property or an ongoing threat of disruption to the academic process, in which case the notice and opportunity for an informal conference shall take place as soon after the suspension as is reasonably practical. Teachers shall immediately report or refer a violent student to the Principal or Superintendent for a violation of the District’s Code of Conduct and a minimum suspension period. More Than Five (5) School Days In situations where the Superintendent determines that a suspension in excess of five (5) school days may be warranted, the student and parent/person in parental relation, upon reasonable notice, shall have had an opportunity for a fair hearing. At the hearing, the student shall have the right of representation by counsel, with the right to question witnesses against him/her, and the right to present witnesses and other evidence on his/her behalf. Where the basis for the suspension is, in whole or in part, the possession on school grounds or school property by the student of any firearm, rifle, shotgun, dagger, dangerous knife, dirk, razor, stiletto or any of the weapons, instruments or appliances specified in Penal Law Section 265.01, the hearing officer or Superintendent shall not be barred from considering the admissibility of such weapon, instrument or appliance as evidence, notwithstanding a determination by a court in a criminal or juvenile delinquency proceeding that the recovery of such weapon, instrument or appliance was the result of an unlawful search or seizure. Minimum Periods of Suspension Pursuant to law, Commissioner’s Regulations and the District’s Code of Conduct, minimum periods of suspension shall be provided for the following prohibited conduct, subject to the requirements of federal and state law and regulations: Consistent with the federal Gun-Free Schools Act, any student who is determined to have brought a firearm to school or possessed a firearm on school premises shall be suspended for a period of not less than one (1) calendar year. However, the Superintendent has the authority to modify this suspension requirement on a case-by-case basis. A minimum suspension period for students who repeatedly are substantially disruptive of the educational process or substantially interfere with the teacher’s authority over the classroom, provided that the suspending authority may reduce such period on a case-by-case basis to be consistent with any other state and federal law. The definition of “repeatedly is substantially disruptive of the educational process or substantially interferes with the teacher’s authority” shall be determined in accordance with the Regulations of the Commissioner. A minimum suspension period for acts that would qualify the student to be defined as a violent student pursuant to Education Law Section 3214(2-a)(a), provided that the suspending authority may reduce such period on a case-by-case basis to be consistent with any other state and federal law. Suspension of Students with Disabilities Generally, should a student with a disability infringe upon the established rules of the schools, disciplinary action shall be in accordance with procedures set forth in the District’s Code of Conduct and in conjunction with applicable law and the determination of the Committee on Special Education (CSE). For suspensions or removals up to ten (10) school days in a school year that do not constitute a disciplinary change in placement, students with disabilities must be provided with alternative instruction or services on the same basis as non-disabled students of the same age. If suspension or removal from the current educational placement constitutes a disciplinary change in placement because it is for more than ten (10) consecutive school days or constitutes a pattern, a manifestation determination must be made. The District determines on a case-by-case basis whether a pattern of removals constitutes a change of placement. This determination is subject to review through due process and judicial proceedings. Manifestation Determinations A review of the relationship between the student’s disability and the behavior subject to disciplinary action to determine if the conduct is a manifestation of the disability must be made by a manifestation team immediately, if possible, but in no case later than ten (10) school days after a decision is made: By the Superintendent to change the placement to an interim alternative educational setting (IAES); By an Impartial Hearing Officer (IHO) to place the student in an IAES; or By the Board, District Superintendent, Superintendent or Building Principal to impose a suspension that constitutes a disciplinary change of placement. The manifestation team shall include a representative of the District knowledgeable about the student and the interpretation of information about child behavior, the parent and relevant members of the CSE as determined by the parent and the District. The parent must receive written notice prior to the meeting to ensure that the parent has an opportunity to attend. This notice must include the purpose of the meeting, the names of those expected to attend and notice of the parent’s right to have relevant members of the CSE participate at the parent’s request. The manifestation team shall review all relevant information in the student’s file including the student’s individualized education program (IEP), any teacher observations, and any relevant information provided by the parents to determine if: the conduct in question was caused by or had a direct and substantial relationship to the student’s disability; or the conduct in question was the direct result of the District’s failure to implement the IEP. If the team determines the conduct in question was the direct result of failure to implement the IEP, the District must take immediate steps to remedy those deficiencies. Finding of Manifestation If it is determined, as a result of this review, that the student’s behavior is a manifestation of his/her disability the CSE shall conduct a functional behavioral assessment, if one has not yet been conducted, and implement or modify a behavioral intervention plan. Functional behavioral assessment (FBA) means the process of determining why the student engages in behaviors that impede learning and how the student’s behavior relates to the environment. FBA must be developed consistent with the requirements of Commissioner’s Regulations Section 200.22(a) and shall include, but not be limited to, the identification of the problem behavior, the definition of the behavior in concrete terms, the identification of the contextual factors that contribute to the behavior (including cognitive and affective factors) and the formulation of a hypothesis regarding the general conditions under which a behavior usually occurs and probable consequences that serve to maintain it. Behavioral intervention plan (BIP) means a plan that is based on the results of a functional behavioral assessment and, at a minimum, includes a description of the problem behavior, global and specific hypotheses as to why the problem behavior occurs and intervention strategies that include positive behavioral supports and services to address the behavior. Unless the change in placement was due to behavior involving serious bodily injury, weapons, illegal drugs or controlled substances, the student must be returned to the placement from which the student was removed unless the parent and the District agree to a change of placement as part of the modification of the behavioral intervention plan. No Finding of Manifestation If it is determined that the student’s behavior is not a manifestation of his/her disability, the relevant disciplinary procedures applicable to students without disabilities may be applied to the student in the same manner and for the same duration for which they would be applied to students without disabilities, subject to the right of the parent/person in parental relation to request a hearing objecting to the manifestation determination and the District’s obligation to provide a free, appropriate public education to such student. Provision of Services Regardless of the Manifestation Determination Regardless of the manifestation determination, students with a disability shall be provided the services necessary for them to continue to participate in the general education curriculum and progress toward meeting the goals set out in their IEP as delineated below: During suspensions or removals for periods of up to ten (10) school days in a school year that do not constitute a disciplinary change in placement, students with disabilities of compulsory attendance age shall be provided with alternative instruction on the same basis as nondisabled students. Students with disabilities who are not of compulsory attendance age shall be entitled to receive services during such suspensions only to the extent that services are provided to nondisabled students of the same age who have been similarly suspended. During subsequent suspensions or removals for periods of ten (10) consecutive school days or less that in the aggregate total more than ten (10) school days in a school year but do not constitute a disciplinary change in placement, students with disabilities shall be provided with services necessary to enable the student to continue to participate in the general education curriculum and to progress toward meeting the goals set out in the student’s IEP and to receive, as appropriate, a functional behavioral assessment, behavioral intervention services and modifications that are designed to address the behavior violation so it does not recur. School personnel, in consultation with at least one (1) of the student’s teachers, shall determine the extent to which services are needed, so as to enable the student to continue to participate in the general education curriculum, although in another setting, and to progress in meeting the goals set out in the student’s IEP. During suspensions or other disciplinary removals, for periods in excess of ten (10) school days in a school year which constitute a disciplinary change in placement, students with disabilities shall be provided with services necessary to enable the student to continue to participate in the general education curriculum, to progress toward meeting the goals set out in the student’s IEP, and to receive, as appropriate, a functional behavioral assessment, behavioral intervention services and modifications that are designed to address the behavior violation so that it does not recur. The IAES and services shall be determined by the CSE. Interim Alternative Educational Setting (IAES) Students with disabilities who have been suspended or removed from their current placement for more than ten (10) school days may be placed in an IAES which is a temporary educational setting other than the student’s current placement at the time the behavior precipitating the IAES placement occurred. Additionally, an Impartial Hearing Officer in an expedited due process hearing may order a change in placement of a student with a disability to an appropriate IAES for up to forty-five (45) school days if the Hearing Officer determines that maintaining the current placement is substantially likely to result in injury to the students or others. There are three (3) specific instances when a student with a disability may be placed in an IAES for up to forty-five (45) school days without regard to a manifestation determination: Where the student carries or possesses a weapon to or at school, on school premises, or to or at a school function under the jurisdiction of the District; or Where a student knowingly possesses or uses illegal drugs or sells or solicits the sale of a controlled substance while at school, on school premises, or at a school function under the jurisdiction of the District; or Where a student has inflicted serious bodily injury upon another person while at school, on school premises, or at a school function under the jurisdiction of the District. Serious bodily harm has been defined in law to refer to one of the following: Substantial risk of death; Extreme physical pain; or Protracted and obvious disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of a bodily member, organ or mental faculty. A school function shall mean a school-sponsored or school-authorized extracurricular event or activity regardless of where such event or activity takes place, including any event or activity that may take place in another state. School personnel may consider any unique circumstances on a case-by-case basis when determining whether to order a change in placement for a student with a disability who violates a code of student conduct. In all cases, the student placed in an IAES shall: Continue to receive educational services so as to enable the student to continue to participate in the general education curriculum, although in another setting, and to progress towards the goals set out in the student’s IEP, and Receive, as appropriate, a functional behavioral assessment and behavioral intervention services and modifications that are designed to address the behavior violation so that it does not recur. The period of suspension or removal may not exceed the amount of time a non-disabled student would be suspended for the same behavior. Suspension from BOCES The BOCES Principal may suspend School District students from BOCES classes for a period not to exceed five (5) school days when student behavior warrants such action. In-School Suspension In-school suspension will be used as a lesser discipline to avoid an out-of-school suspension. The student shall be considered present for attendance purposes. The program is used to keep each student current with his/her class work while attempting to reinforce acceptable behavior, attitudes and personal interaction. BOCES Activities BOCES activities, such as field trips and other activities outside the building itself, are considered an extension of the school program. Therefore, an infraction handled at BOCES is to be considered as an act within the School District itself. A student who is ineligible to attend a District school on a given day may also be ineligible to attend BOCES classes. The decision rests with the Superintendent or his/her designee. Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies If a parent/person in parental relation wishes to appeal the decision of the Building Principal and/or Superintendent to suspend a student from school, regardless of the length of the student’s suspension, the parent/person in parental relation must appeal to the Board of Education prior to commencing an appeal to the Commissioner of Education. Procedure After Suspension When a student has been suspended and is of compulsory attendance age, immediate steps shall be taken to provide alternative instruction which is of an equivalent nature to that provided in the student’s regularly scheduled classes. When a student has been suspended, the suspension may be revoked by the Board of Education whenever it appears to be for the best interest of the school and the student to do so. The Board of Education may also condition a student’s early return to school and suspension revocation on the student’s voluntary participation in counseling or specialized classes, including anger management or dispute resolution, where applicable. XXI. Dissemination and Review The board will work to ensure that the community is aware of the code of conduct by: Providing copies of a summary of the code of conduct to all students in an age-appropriate plain-language version at a general school assembly held at the beginning of each school year. Making copies of the code available to all parents at the beginning of the school year. Mailing a summary of the code of conduct written in plain language to all parents of district students before the beginning of the school year and making this summary available later upon request. Providing all current teachers and other staff members with a copy of the code and copy of any amendments to the code as soon as practical after adoption. Providing all new employees with a copy of the current code of conduct when they are first hired. Making copies of the code available for review by students, parents and other community members. The board will also sponsor an in-service education program for all district staff members to ensure the effective implementation of school policy on school conduct and discipline, including but not limited to, guidelines for promoting a safe and supportive school climate while discouraging, among other things, discrimination or harassment against students by students and/or school employees, and including safe and supportive school climate concepts in the curriculum and classroom. Such training shall be designed to raise staff awareness and sensitivity to potential discrimination or harassment and provide strategies and responses to assist staff in responding to reports and incidents of discrimination and harassment and to help discourage their reoccurrence. The board will review this code of conduct every year and update it as necessary. In conducting the review, the board will consider how effective the code’s provisions have been and whether the code has been applied fairly and consistently. The board may appoint an advisory committee to assist in reviewing the code and the district’s response to code violations. Before adopting any revisions to the code, the board will hold at least one public hearing at which school personnel, parents, students, and any other interested party may participate. The District shall post the complete Code of Conduct, with all amendments and annual updates, on the District’s website. The code of conduct and any amendments to it will be filed with the Commissioner no later than 30 days after adoption.
