3411 – Athletic Code of Conduct

3411 – Athletic Code of Conduct Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 3411 – Athletic Code of Conduct October 21 , 2024 Welcome from the Broadalbin-Perth Athletic Department. We are excited to have you join a program that exemplifies a great tradition of excellence. This excellence involves areas that extend far beyond winning and losing. Athletic success is the direct result of the combination of effort, teamwork, commitment, and sportsmanship. These traits have long been the building blocks of Broadalbin-Perth's identity. We are pleased you have joined the Broadalbin-Perth Athletic Community of coaches, student-athletes, and parents in continuing this tradition of excellence. Message to the Parent/Guardian: This information is presented to you because your son/daughter has indicated a desire to participate in the interscholastic athletic program at Broadalbin-Perth Jr./Sr. High school and you have expressed your willingness to permit him/her to compete. Participation in sports provides a wealth of opportunities and experiences that assist student athletes in personal, athletic, and academic growth. As a parent/guardian of a student-athlete, you also have committed yourselves to certain responsibilities and obligations which are outlined in this Athletic Code of Conduct. Your signature on this athletic code, along with the signature of your student-athlete, indicates that you understand and accept those responsibilities and obligations, and agree to cooperate with school personnel in enforcing the Athletic Code of Conduct. Compliance with the Athletic Code of Conduct is mandatory and essential to the success of the athletic program. Failure to comply with the BP Athletic Code of Conduct may lead to discipline and possible expulsion from the team. The Broadalbin-Perth Athletic Department strives to provide: Adequate equipment and facilities; Educated and experienced coaches; Appropriate competitions with certified officials; Support to student-athletes, coaches, and parents. Good sportsmanship is encouraged and expected from our fans and spectators at all times during athletic events. Failure to exhibit good sportsmanship may result in removal from the event and/or future events. In addition to attending Broadalbin-Perth Athletics contests, you are invited and encouraged to join the Broadalbin-Perth Sports Booster Club and help promote the tradition of excellence associated with Broadalbin-Perth Athletics. We believe athletics is an integral part of the secondary educational experience, both as a competitor and spectator. We look forward to working with you and to supporting your son/daughter as they participate in their chosen sport. Message to the Student-Athlete: Broadalbin-Perth has a long history and tradition of athletic excellence. This tradition took years of dedication, commitment, and hard work by a countless number of people. As a Broadalbin-Perth student-athlete you must continue to strive to uphold this high standard of excellence. Broadalbin-Perth students represent themselves, their family, their team, and the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District at all times, whether on the field, in the classroom, in the community, or away at events. Therefore, student--athletes should always project a positive image, which the community and school district would be proud of. All Broadalbin-Perth student-athletes are bound by the Broadalbin-Perth Athletics Code of Conduct, which will earn them the honor and respect that participation and competition in interscholastic athletics affords. Participation in sports is a privilege and not a right. Students, staff, parents, and the community will closely observe your conduct. Any unsportsmanlike and/or inappropriate conduct which reflects negatively or unfavorably on the school, the team, or the student-athlete will not be tolerated. The rules outlined in this code of conduct are designed and intended as a guide to successful participation. As a student-athlete, you will be expected to understand and abide by these rules and your team's rules. It is your responsibility to follow them to their fullest. Responsibilities to Yourself: The most importance of these responsibilities is to develop strength of character and positive core values and behaviors. You owe it to yourself to get the greatest possible benefit from your athletic experience. Your academic studies and your participation in athletics will help prepare you for your life as an adult. Responsibilities to the Broadalbin-Perth CSD Community: As a member of an athletic team, you assume a responsibility to take on a leadership role in your school. The student body and community know who you are. The student body, the community, and surrounding communities judge our school by your conduct and attitudes, both on and off the field. As a leader, you can make a positive contribution to Broadalbin-Perth school spirit and community pride. In addition, you are a role model for younger student-athletes. These student-athletes look up to you and dream of being as successful as we hope you to be. Be sure the example you set is a positive one. Broadalbin-Perth cannot maintain its reputation and integrity as a flagship school unless you hold yourself accountable and to a high standard. Responsibilities to Others: As a team member you also bear a heavy responsibility to your family. Your work ethic and attitude combined with giving your best effort on a daily basis in practice and games provides you with the self-respect that your family can be proud of. Broadalbin-Perth Athletic Department Mission Statement The purpose of Broadalbin-Perth Athletics is to provide opportunities for ALL participating student-athletes to learn life-long values in a safe environment. The values include: Leadership Skills, Teamwork, Pride, Respect, and Sportsmanship. The student-athletes, coaches, and parents of the Broadalbin-Perth Athletic Department believe: That student-athletes will have opportunities to develop strong leadership skills through athletic competition that will carry into the classroom and the future. That student-athletes will serve as role models within the school community and are expected to act in a manner that reinforces that role. That self-discipline and sportsmanship are essential to a sound athletic foundation. That pride builds respect, of self and others which helps create strong and lasting friendships through athletic competition. That participation in athletics is not a right but a privilege; with that privilege, comes responsibility. That a strong commitment is an important ingredient to the success of Broadalbin-Perth Athletics. That athletics should be fun as well as providing learning experiences. Athletic Philosophy The Broadalbin-Perth Central School District understands that interscholastic athletics are a significant part of the educational process. The combination of academics and athletics expands student options for learning and personal growth leading to well-rounded student-athletes. Athletics provide an educational opportunity in which students can learn essential life lessons and values beyond those learned in the classroom. The purpose of the Broadalbin-Perth Athletic Department is to develop lifelong skills for students in character, leadership, respect, and sportsmanship. We will achieve this by providing opportunities for students to compete successfully within the Foothills Council, Section 2, and NYSPHSAA. Modified Philosophy Broadalbin-Perth CSD offers its 7th and 8th grade students choices when it comes to athletics. The philosophy of modified sports differs from that of Junior Varsity and Varsity. The modified sports program is designed to be a learning experience and teaching program in which participants gain exposure to athletics. The goal is to learn about the game and about sportsmanship, rather than focusing solely on a successful record. At this level the focus is on learning athletic skills and game rules, fundamentals of team play, social and emotional growth, physiologically appropriate demands of the adolescent body, and healthy competition. This program is designed to offer students the opportunity to engage in a more highly organized competitive experience that was found at the recreational level, but not as involved as those found at the junior varsity or varsity level. With this in mind, it is typical to see all team members participating, not just the student-athletes who have developed better skill levels. Modified student-athletes will also learn some other valuable lessons along the way, such as responsibility to team members, organizational and time management skills, as well as cooperating to achieve a common goal. Modified sports is an introduction to the parents and the family commitment involved in athletics as well. Modified Programs Offered: Fall: Football, Boys and Girls Soccer, Boys and Girls Cross Country, Girls Volleyball, Cheerleading, Boys & Girls Golf Winter: Boys and Girls Basketball, Alpine Skiing, Competitive Cheer, Swimming, Wrestling Spring: Baseball, Softball, Boys and Girls Track & Field, Boys and Girls Lacrosse, Tennis Junior Varsity/Freshman Philosophy The Junior Varsity (JV) and Freshmen level is intended for the athlete who demonstrates the potential of continued development into a productive Varsity athlete. At the JV and Freshman level, the athlete is expected to have a full commitment to the team and demonstrates continued self-development. An increased emphasis is placed on physical conditioning, skill development, and a better understanding of the strategies of team play. The JV and Freshman program works towards achieving a balance between continued team and player development and team success. The outcome of a contest becomes a consideration at this level. An attempt will be made to give all team members meaningful contest participation over the course of a season, however; equal playing time is neither required nor expected. The Freshman level should prepare the athlete for the goal of becoming a JV athlete. The JV level should prepare the athlete for the goal of becoming a Varsity athlete with the highest level of dedication and commitment. Freshman Program Offered: Boys Basketball JV Programs Offered: Fall: Cheerleading, Football, Boys and Girls Soccer, Girls Volleyball Winter: Boys and Girls Basketball, Competitive Cheer, Bowling, Indoor Track & Field, Boys & Girls Alpine Ski, Wrestling Spring: Baseball, Softball, Boys and Girls Track & Field, Boys and Girls Lacrosse Varsity Philosophy The Varsity level of interscholastic athletics is the culmination of the high school athletic program. Varsity level athletes should be aware of their role and informed of their role and importance on the team. Team play, sportsmanship, individual physical ability, motivation, and mental attitude are all very important aspects of competition at this level. While contest participation over the course of a season is desirable, a specified amount of playing time is not guaranteed. Preparing to win and striving for victory in each contest are worthy goals of a varsity level team. The Varsity coach is the leader of his/her program and is responsible for communication and program development at each level. Such commitment is needed to conduct a successful varsity program. Varsity Programs Offered: Fall: Cheerleading, Boys and Girls Cross Country, Football, Boys and Girls Golf, Boys and Girls Soccer, Girls Volleyball, Girls Swimming, Girls Tennis, Unified Bocce Winter: Boys and Girls Basketball, Boys and Girls Bowling, Competitive Cheer, Boys and Girls Indoor Track & Field, Boys and Girls Alpine Skiing, Ice Hockey, Boys Swimming, Wrestling, Unified Bowling Spring: Baseball, Softball, Boys and Girls Lacrosse, Boys and Girls Track & Field, Boys Tennis, Unified Basketball Athletic Placement Process (APP) The Athletic Placement Process permits physically and emotionally appropriate 7th and 8th grade students to try out for Varsity, JV, and Freshmen level teams. This program is designed for the exceptional few student-athletes who would be better served by playing on a higher level team than age and grade might indicate. It is expected that very few student-athletes will participate under this NYSED approved program. Specific criteria must be collected and evaluated by the Director of Athletics prior to a student trying out for a team. This evaluation is a comprehensive evaluation of your child's emotional and physical maturity, athletic abilities, physical fitness, and sport specific athletic skill in relation to other student-athletes at that level. “ATHLETE” DEFINED: An athlete is defined as any BPCSD student who is a member of an interscholastic team sponsored by BPCSD. This includes team members, managers, student trainers, statisticians, and any other student role associated with an athletic team or program. Application of the Code of Conduct The Broadalbin-Perth Athletic Code of Conduct will apply to each student-athlete for one calendar year (including summer) from the date of his/her most recent signature and will be in effect in all locations including non-school activities. All violations of the Code of Conduct will be cumulative beginning with a student's participation on a modified, freshman, junior varsity, or varsity team. The student-athlete is under the Athletic Code of Conduct effective the date it is signed. The code is in effect for 12 calendar months from the date of signature, including during the summer months. Attendance for Student-Athletes A student-athlete who is tardy or absent from school will not be eligible for participation at any extracurricular or athletic event or practice session on the day he or she is tardy or absent. This will include participation as a spectator at such events. The Director of Athletics may permit participation where, in his/her judgment, the tardiness or absence is unavoidable. Students and/or parents are advised to make requests for excuses in advance whenever possible. Student-athletes are expected to attend all practice sessions and games unless excused by his/her coach. It is the student participant's responsibility to notify the coach well in advance for such excuses. Academic Eligibility All student-athletes will have their academic progress monitored by the Athletic Department at the completion of every 5 week period. Any student-athlete who is failing 1 or more classes will be placed on academic probation. Student-athletes on academic probation are required to attend an after school athletic study hall session 2 times per week. Failure to report to the athletic study hall will make the student-athlete ineligible for participation in interscholastic athletics for one contest for every absence of study hall. A student-athlete must be passing for 2 consecutive weeks to be taken off of probation and discontinue athletic study hall. If a student-athlete is still failing the course but shows improvement they will remain on probation and continue with athletic study hall. The Director of Athletics and teacher will determine the progress and effort of the student-athlete in determining a player’s eligibility to participate. Students with multiple failures will be subject to review by the Director of Athletics and Building Principal to determine eligibility for participation in athletics. Student-Athlete grades will be checked prior to starting the winter and spring seasons. If a student-athlete comes into a sport failing, he or she will automatically start in athletic study hall. Athletic Code of Conduct Participation in interscholastic athletics at Broadalbin-Perth is a privilege, not a right, and is contingent upon the student-athlete's willingness to commit to the provisions of the Athletic Code of Conduct. The privilege of wearing a Broadalbin-Perth uniform should elicit great pride in both student-athletes and his/her family. It is also a responsibility which requires an extra commitment, both inside and outside of the school building. Standards of behavior are necessarily high and a willingness to live up to them is a condition for participation. Consistent with these standards, and as a continuing condition of eligibility, student-athletes are required to sign the Athletic Code of Conduct prior to each season. The student-athlete's signature, along with that of his/her parent/guardian, indicates they both recognize and understand this responsibility and that the student-athlete agrees to adhere to the Athletic Code of Conduct. Appropriate Conduct Requirements Student-athletes shall avoid any infractions of the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District Code of Conduct. In addition, student-athletes shall avoid any action(s) or the participation in an activity outside of school, which might bring embarrassment or an unfavorable view on the student-athlete, his/her teammates, coaches, family, school or community. Such alleged violation(s) will be subject to review and possible subsequent action. Examples of some behaviors which would be considered as violations of the Athletic Code of Conduct include but are not limited to: Any infraction which results in an Out of School Suspension (OSS) ALCOHOL, DRUGS & TOBACCO ARE STRICTLY PROHIBITED. The possession, use, consumption, distribution, purchase, sale or manufacture of, or any other improper or unlawful involvement of any kind or description with illegal drugs, controlled substances, alcohol or alcoholic beverages, anabolic or androgenic steroids, tobacco, tobacco products, E-Cigarettes, Vapor Pens, or facsimiles, "lookalike" drugs, drug paraphernalia, or substances or products that mask or tamper with any of these, is strictly prohibited. Also prohibited is the distribution, abuse or misuse of over the counter medications or prescription drugs, or other chemicals or substances. Sale of Illegal Drugs (including drug paraphernalia) – Any student-athlete found to be selling illegal drugs will be suspended for one calendar year from the date of the sale. Search - Students who voluntarily participate in the athletic program also agree to submit to random searches of their personal effects, and to searches, including but not limited to breathalyzer testing, based on individualized suspicion for violation of these rules. Constructive Possession - Student-athletes who are found to have been voluntarily associating with others who are illegally using, possessing or selling drugs, drug paraphernalia or alcohol, and who do not attempt to remove themselves in a reasonable amount of time are in violation of the Athletic Code of Conduct. Hazing is Strictly Prohibited - Because hazing is unsafe, and can discourage participation as well as negatively affect a student's enjoyment in athletic participation, all forms of hazing are strictly prohibited. Coaches will not permit, nor will student-athletes participate in, any type of hazing at any time. Hazing is defined by any conduct or method of initiation into any interscholastic team, whether on public or private property, which deliberately or recklessly exploits a less powerful student-athlete physically, emotionally, and/or socially. Hazing includes, but is not limited to: Any gesture or written, verbal or physical act that a reasonable person under the circumstances should know will have the effect of harming a student or placing a student in reasonable fear of harm to his or her person, or damage to his or her property; Any type of physical force, harm or injury inflicted by athletes on their team members such as whipping, beating, striking, branding, electronic shocking, or placing an unwanted substance on the student's body; Any type of coerced or involuntary sexual or physical activity, such as sleep deprivation, exposure to weather, confinement in a restricted area, calisthenics, or other coerced or unwelcome confinement, restriction or other forced activity by athletes on their fellow team members; Any coerced or involuntary activity by athletes on their team members that subject the athletes to an unreasonable risk of harm or that adversely affects their mental or physical health, safety, or welfare; or Any coerced or involuntary activity inflicted, encouraged or mandated by athletes on their team members, such as the consumption of alcoholic beverages, illegal, unauthorized, or foreign substances of any type whatsoever, tobacco or tobacco products, over the counter medication or prescription drugs, or any other unreasonable risk of harm or activity that adversely affects an athlete's mental or physical health, safety, welfare or interest in the sport. For purposes of this rule, a team member's voluntary participation in hazing is not necessarily a defense to a claimed violation of this rule. Athletes who organize or initiate hazing activities, but do not directly participate in them, are equally subject to possible discipline as students who directly participate in acts of hazing. In addition, student-athletes are expected and required to report suspected violations of this rule. Athletes may be disciplined for failure to report known hazing violations or for falsely denying knowledge of known hazing activities. Stealing and/or Destruction of Property - To steal or be an accomplice to the act of stealing community property, school property, or the property of athletes, team managers or coaches, or our opponents property; to destroy or deface school property or the property of others. Gross Misconduct - Gross misconduct is defined as cheating, fighting, or unfavorable notoriety, violation of a civil or criminal law, or any socially unacceptable behavior that brings discredit to the athlete, parents, school or team. This includes any negative behavior on social media. Cyber Image Evidence: Any identifiable image, photo, video, posted online conversation which implicates a student-athlete to have been in violation of this Athletic Code of Conduct shall be confirmation of a violation. Application of the Code As previously stated, the rules in the Athletic Code of Conduct apply 365 days, on or off school premises, and are not limited to school sponsored activities or sports. Each coach also has the prerogative to establish additional guidelines specific to his/her particular team, so long as such guidelines do not erode or minimize the criteria set forth herein. Penalties At all times, student-athletes are expected to follow the Broadalbin-Perth CSD Athletic Code of Conduct and to behave in a manner consistent with the special privilege of being a Broadalbin-Perth student-athlete. The consequences below outline the range of possible discipline that may be imposed for the listed violations and may be modified or tailored by the Director of Athletics and Building Principal to meet the circumstances of special situations as they arise. The Director of Athletics has complete discretion to depart from the listed range of discipline if the circumstances of a particular case justify a departure. The facts of the incident may warrant immediate removal from the team if the Director of Athletics and the Building Principal believe that the offense committed warrants such action. Please note violations of the Athletic Code of Conduct may be required to be disclosed and may reflect negatively on applications to universities, colleges, and military academies. The District reserves the right to disclose violations in its sole discretion. Violations will be cumulative during a student's athletic career. Cumulation will begin the first day a student-athlete begins trying out for any team and will continue throughout his/her entire career. The first violation of any of the following codes will be considered the first offense when determining the consequence. When a second violation of any of the following codes occurs, then the second offense consequence be imposed. Upon a third offense of any of the following codes, then the third consequence will be applied. First Offense - Suspension from 25% of the total scheduled competitive events and loss of privilege of being a team captain during the season of suspension. If an offense occurs that is deemed to be a violation of the Athletic Code of Conduct, the student-athlete will be allowed to practice with the team, but shall not be allowed to participate in the team's scheduled contests. Scrimmages are not considered scheduled contests. Penalties which cannot be served during the sport season in which they are imposed will be carried over for completion in the next sports season in which the student-athlete participates. The penalty assigned will be adjusted proportionately based on the number of regular season scheduled contests in the subsequent season. Second Offense If a second offense occurs, the game suspension is 50% of the total scheduled contests. For a second offense within the same sports season the student- athlete will be suspended for the remainder of the season. Third Offense If a third offense occurs the student-athlete shall be removed from participation in all interscholastic athletics for one calendar year beginning on the date the penalty for the third offense is imposed. Offenses Resulting in Arrest or the Filing of Formal Charges in Court. In the case of an arrest for a criminal offense or filing of charges, disciplinary action will be at the discretion of the Director of Athletics and Building Principal. It should be noted, notwithstanding the above percentage of penalties, that facts of an incident may warrant immediate removal from the team if the Director of Athletics and Building Principal believe that the offense committed by the student-athlete warrants such action. Students who voluntarily participate in the athletic program also agree to submit to random searches of their personal effects, and to searches, including but not limited to breathalyzer testing, based on individualized suspicion for violation of these rules. Self-Reporting Any Athletic Code of Conduct violation that is self-reported to the Director of Athletics prior to the athletic staff and/or Director of Athletics awareness of the violation may result in up to a 50% reduction of the normal penalty. This will only be offered one time during the career of the student-athlete. Reporting Code of Conduct Violations Written report to Director of Athletics of the infraction or warning of an infraction via police report, court decisions or public information vehicles (papers, magazines, etc.), or source considered reliable by the Director of Athletics. The Director of Athletics shall notify the student-athlete of a reported violation within a reasonable time after receiving the report or learning of the violation. Due Process - Prior to imposition of any penalty under the Athletic Code of Conduct, the Director of Athletics will notify the student-athlete and/or parent/guardian of the nature of the infraction and the student will be given an opportunity to explain his or her side of the story. Written report of the charges and penalty to parents/guardian from the Director of Athletics within five school days of the Director of Athletics’ decision. Appeal Procedure The student-athlete and/or the student-athlete's parent or guardian have the right to appeal penalties imposed under the Athletics Code of Conduct by the Director of Athletics. Appeals must be made in writing within three school days of assignment of a penalty for a code violation to the Building Principal and Director of Athletics. A response to the appeal will be provided within three school days after receipt of the letter by the Building Principal and the Director of Athletics. Sports Try-Outs Regarding Team Selection: All student-athletes will be guaranteed a minimum of 3 days of try-outs for those particular sports that have to cut. Some sports do require cuts due to the number of athletes that are interested in participating on that team Every student-athlete is evaluated in a fair and impartial manner. Attendance is mandatory during the try-out period. The only exceptions are: Medical Reasons Extension of a school sports season (post-season) Participation in Sectional/Postseason Contests: Participation of all postseason games/contests will be determined by the Varsity Head Coach; with final approval by the Director of Athletics. Leaving/Withdrawing from a Team An athlete desiring to drop from a team within the try out period shall notify the coach immediately to obtain a release without consequence. The coach is required to notify the Director of Athletics of said release within three working days. An athlete desiring to drop from the team after team selection has been made, may be subject to a consequence at the discretion of the Director of Athletics. A meeting between the athlete, coach, and Director of Athletics will be held to decide the validity of a release or consequence, which could include exclusion from athletics for the next sport or season. The decision of the Director of Athletics is final. Note: Coaches have the right to recommend to the Director of Athletics the dismissal of participants from the team roster for conduct considered detrimental to the team. Release can be done with or without consequence. The decision of the Director of Athletics is final. Changing Sports No student may quit one sport and then participate in another once the teams have been selected. If he/she has been cut from one team, it is legitimate to try out for another sport. All legitimate requests for changing sports must be made through the Director of Athletics. Team Attendance Dedicated participation of each student-athlete is essential to the morale and performance of the entire team and program. Student-athletes are expected to commit themselves to team membership, practice attendance, and contest attendance for the duration of the season. When this commitment is not fulfilled, the student-athlete's membership and position on the team shall be reviewed by the coach and Director of Athletics. Because many different factors may cause a student to miss the practice(s) or contest(s), a hard and fast policy is difficult to establish. The following are attendance "rules of thumb" to follow: A student-athlete missing a school team's practice(s) or contest(s) due to participation in a non-school team's contest or practice may lose membership on the school team. A student-athlete missing a school team's practice(s) and/or contest(s) due to a trip he or she must go on with immediate family will not be dismissed from the team. Possibly, the student will not be able to return to the same position he/she held on the team prior to leaving. In the event of an absence due to a family vacation during the school issued breaks, a student-athlete must: Contact the Head Coach a minimum of two weeks prior to the vacation. The Student-Athlete must provide a written notification from the immediate family member of the dates of the family vacation. Be willing to assume the consequences related to their status on that team as a starter, second string, third string, etc. Accept the specific program rules and regulations. Student-athletes who do not abide by these rules, may be dismissed from the team. All cases shall be decided based on the commitment of the student-athlete, the factors involved, and the fairness to the remaining team members. Transportation Student-athletes will be transported to and from all away athletic contests by school authorized vehicles. Parents need prior approval from the Director of Athletics to transport their own child home if there are extenuating circumstances. Participation in Physical Education All student-athletes are expected to attend and participate in all classes including dressing for and participating in physical education class. If a student does not participate in physical education class on the day of a scheduled practice or game, the student-athlete is not eligible to participate in that day's practice or game. Locker Room Privacy Policy Using devices of any kind to capture or transmit images is strictly prohibited in locker rooms, dressing areas, training rooms, weigh-in rooms, showers, restrooms, or other areas where there is an expectation of privacy. Social Media It is important that student-athletes recognize the power of social media and the potential negative image that they can portray about other student-athletes, coaches, the athletic program, and the school district. While we respect the right of student-athletes to utilize the variety of social media options available, the following guidelines are to be followed by our student-athletes at all times: Refrain from posting material, including pictures, that is threatening, harassing, illegal, obscene, defamatory, slanderous, hostile, or promoting illegal activities. Refrain from posting email addresses or any other confidential information of student-athletes, coaches, or any other person other than yourself. Be aware that college coaches, college recruiters, and future employers access your social networking sites. The information that you post is considered public information. Protect yourself by maintaining a self-image that you can be proud of years from now. Any inappropriate activity that is in violation of the above guidelines is subject to investigation and possible discipline. Community Service Requirement It is expected that each athletic program will complete one community service project during the course of their season. This will be an agreed upon activity between the Head Varsity Coach, his/her team/program, and the Director of Athletics. It is important to give back to our community and athletics provides us with the platform to make an impact in our community. Dual Sports Students are normally not permitted to participate in dual sports during the same sports season (fall, winter, spring). Students who desire to participate in dual sports must apply and receive permission from the Director of Athletics on a form provided by the Athletic Department two weeks prior to the start of the season. The Director of Athletics will consider input from parents, the student-athlete, coaches and BPCSD faculty. The decision of the Director of Athletics is final. Conflicts in Co-curricular Activities Despite all scheduling efforts by the administration, conflicts will occur between athletic and non-athletic activities and events. The following guidelines shall apply to students who experience conflicts between BPCSD school-related activities: When a conflict occurs between two scheduled activities the student's first duty is to notify both coach/advisors as early as possible. The coach/advisors will attempt to resolve the conflict to best allow the student to participate in as many activities as possible. The student will then be advised of the recommended solution to the conflict. It is expected that the student will follow the recommendation OR propose an equally acceptable alternative. When a conflict occurs between a competition/performance and a scheduled practice, students will be expected to attend the competition/performance (without loss of group membership or standing in the other activity). When a conflict occurs between scheduled practices, the students will be expected to participate in one (without loss of group membership in the other activity). Frequently missing practice sessions may jeopardize a student's standing within his/her group or team. Frequent conflicts will be balanced to the extent possible so that the student attends both activities equally. When a conflict occurs between competitions/performances, students may participate in one activity without loss of group membership or standing in the other activity. There may be times when students may simultaneously participate in multiple Broadalbin-Perth activities/events by prior arrangement with the coaches/advisors. Outside Team Rule: NYSPHSAA allows outside competition. However, Broadalbin-Perth student-athletes must understand that commitment to the school comes first, and outside participation should not be detrimental to an individual or to a Broadalbin-Perth team. There will be circumstances where a student should not participate in an outside activity due to the possible effect on the team. Do not participate until you check with the individual coach involved with the school team and the Director of Athletics. The first obligation and responsibility of the student-athlete is to BPCSD's academic and athletic programs. Specialization The Broadalbin-Perth Athletic Department encourages student-athletes to participate in a variety of sports and does not endorse in principle or practice the concept of specialization. Specialization occurs when a student-athlete involves himself/herself in one athletic activity over an extended period of time, forsaking other athletic endeavors of interest. Student-athletes who specialize in one sport tend to get injured more often and lose interest in their sport over time. School Equipment Student-athletics are responsible for all school equipment issued to them. Athletic uniforms, both practice and game, are supplied for the sole purpose of athletic participation. This equipment is not to be used for any other purpose. When the season is completed all school equipment is to be returned to the school. There are no exceptions to this policy. Student-athletes who violate this policy are subject to school rules, the Athletic Code, and may be referred to law enforcement. Students, who wish to wear a uniform for pictures, need a coach's approval first. Any such pictures are to be taken in good taste and with pride. Remember, any time you wear Broadalbin-Perth attire, you are representing yourself, your family, your school and all those that have worn our school colors before you. Senior Night or Day Ceremonies Senior recognition ceremonies and celebrations are defined as a time when a program or team recognizes and thanks seniors who have participated in an interscholastic program. These guidelines will be followed to ensure consistency among programs and to respect our opponents, spectators and officials. The date for Senior Night/Day will always be scheduled as the last regular season home game/contest unless prior permission was granted by the Director of Athletics. This will allow for consistency in planning for coaches, athletes and parents/guardians. The ceremony should take place prior to the contest warm-up time. The ceremony should last no more than 15 minutes in length. Athletes will only be announced with parents, step-parents or guardians, which will be escorted in front of spectators to be recognized. End of Year Banquets All end of year banquets, celebrations, and/or gatherings will be at the discretion of the Varsity Head Coach. Guide for a Successful Parent/Coach Relationship Both parenting and coaching are extremely difficult jobs. By establishing an understanding of each position, we are better able to accept the actions of the others and provide greater benefit to the student. As parents, when your son or daughter becomes involved in our programs, you have a right to understand what expectations are placed on your student-athletes. This begins with clear communication from the coach of your student-athlete's program. Communication You Should Expect from your Son/Daughter's Coach: Expectations the coach has for your son/daughter and the team Locations and times of all practices and contests in advance Team Rules/Expectations that are separate from the Athletic Code of Conduct Team Guidelines for off-season conditioning and workouts Communication of injuries and medical treatment Communication Coaches Expect from Student-Athletes: Notification of any schedule conflicts in advance. Special concerns in regards to a coach's philosophy and/or expectations. Injury or circumstances that may endanger the athlete when participating. Coaches are professionals and will make judgment decisions based on what they believe to be the best for all student-athletes involved on the team. Please understand that there are acceptable things that should be discussed as well as other things that must be left to the discretion of the coach. Appropriate Concerns to Discuss with Coaches: Treatment of your son/daughter Ways to help your son/daughter to improve his/her skills Concerns about your son/daughter's behavior/attitude Player's role on the team Discipline that results in the denial of a player's participation Issues Not Appropriate to Discuss with Coaches: Playing time Team Strategy Play calling Other student-athletes COMMUNICATION PROCESS & CHAIN OF COMMAND As students become involved in the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District Athletic Programs, they will be provided with the opportunities to experience some of the most rewarding moments of their lives. It is important to understand that there may also be times when things do not go the way a player or parent/guardian might have hoped and may require a conference between the coach and the student athlete and/or parent. It is important that both parties involved have a clear understanding of the other's position. When these conferences are necessary, the following procedures should be followed to help promote a resolution to the issue of concern. First and foremost: If you have a concern, you need to discuss the issue with your son/daughter first. You may find through this communication an answer, resolution, or understanding of the situation before contacting others. If the situation warrants a conference, communication between coach and player/parent/guardian becomes extremely important, and all are required to follow the Chain of Command in an effort to reach an acceptable resolution: As a first step in addressing a concern, the player is expected to be his/her own advocate and speak directly with the coach. If the player's concern is not resolved to his/her satisfaction, the parent/guardian may make arrangements to meet with the coach. Call or email the coach to set up an appointment. If the coach cannot be reached, Call the Director of Athletics, and the meeting will be set up for you. Please give yourself time to understand your concern before approaching a coach. Attempting to confront a coach before or after a contest or practice is NOT an ideal time. These can be emotional times for both the parent and the coach. Meetings of this nature do not promote resolution. In the event that an acceptable understanding cannot be reached with the coach, the parent/guardian may contact the Director of Athletics for further discussion and/or investigation. Please note that: A conference that is set up with a coach and parent shall not result in negative consequences against the student-athlete because of this meeting. Sportsmanship - Checklist for a Successful Athletic Experience As a student-athlete and as parents, you can help us establish an outstanding reputation for good sportsmanship. We must all work hard in conducting ourselves in a commendable manner. A display of unsportsmanlike conduct can result in a negative perception of Broadalbin-Perth as well as punishment of the offending student-athlete, parent, and/or school. Always observe the following guidelines for good sportsmanship: The good name of Broadalbin-Perth is more important than any contest won by unfair play. Be supportive of all athletes, coaches, and officials before, during, and after all contests. Accept decisions of officials without dispute. They are seldom responsible for your success or failure, so do not blame them for your circumstances. Recognize and show appreciation for the fine play of your opponent. Be proud of Broadalbin-Perth's reputation and work hard to protect it. Cheer for your team, not against the opponent. Don't allow negative sportsmanship of others to become an excuse to do the same. BROADALBIN-PERTH CENTRAL SCHOOL DISTRICT SPORTSMANSHIP & BEHAVIOR GUIDELINES FOR ALL SPECTATORS Spectators are an important part of the athletic programs and are encouraged to conform to accepted standards of good sportsmanship and behavior. Spectators should at all times: respect officials, visiting coaches, players and school administrators as guests in the community; and extend all courtesies to them. Verbal abuse of athletes or officials by team members or spectators shall be considered unsportsmanlike conduct. Enthusiastic cheering for one's team is strongly encouraged. Booing, whistling, stamping of feet and disrespectful remarks shall be discouraged. There will be no ringing of bells, sounding of horns, or other noise makers at indoor contests during play. The throwing of debris, confetti, or other objects from the stands is prohibited. Spectators should encourage each other to observe courteous behavior. Improper behavior should be reported to school authorities. Spectators will observe the rules of the local school concerning smoking, food and drink consumption, littering, substance abuse, and parking procedures. Spectators will respect and obey all identified school officials and supervisors at athletic contests. Any spectator who demonstrates poor sportsmanship will be requested to leave and may be denied admission to future contests. Broadalbin-Perth Patriots Interscholastic Athletics Code of Conduct Agreement As a condition precedent for participation in interscholastic athletics, students and his/her parent/guardian must sign the agreement to comply with the provisions of this Code of Conduct as prescribed below and submit it to the team coach. The school community realizes that in order for this Athletic Code of Conduct to be adhered to, students must believe in it and discipline themselves to comply with it. Student-athletics must be willing to make personal sacrifices for the team to which they have committed themselves. All members of a team are expected to help each other adhere to this Athletic Code of Conduct. Parent/guardian(s) have a responsibility to their children and are asked to support their son or daughter in complying with this Athletic Code of Conduct. Parent/guardian(s) are expected to notify the coach or Director of Athletics of any infraction of this Athletic Code of Conduct.
