3422 – School Safety and Educational Climate (SSEC) Reporting

3422 – School Safety and Educational Climate (SSEC) Reporting Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 3422 – School Safety and Educational Climate (SSEC) Reporting January 22 , 2024 The Board of Education is committed to promoting and maintaining the safety of all students, staff, and visitors to the schools. The Board is also committed to maintaining a school environment that is free from harassment, bullying, and discrimination. Consistent with these commitments and in accordance with state law and regulation, the district will submit an annual report to the Commissioner of Education regarding violent and disruptive incidents and material incidents of harassment/bullying/discrimination, as part of the New York State Education Department’s School Safety and Educational Climate (SSEC) Summary Data Collection. In addition, the Board will use this data to assess the safety and educational climate of its schools and, where appropriate, identify and take steps to improve the safety, security, and well-being of its students, staff, and visitors. Reporting Requirement Each Building Principal is responsible for preparing on a regular basis a report of all the violent and disruptive incidents and material incidents of harassment, bullying, and discrimination, that have occurred on school grounds, at a school function, or at a school-sponsored event and forwarding the report to the Superintendent of Schools. The Superintendent or designee is responsible for compiling the reports received from the Building Principals into the annual report and submitting the report to the Commissioner. The summary report will contain all the information required by law and will be filed with the Commissioner on or before a date set by the Commissioner. The Superintendent will also present this summary report to the Board at its first meeting following the filing of the report with the Commissioner. Additionally, Building Principals are required to provide a regular report on data and trends related to harassment, bullying, and/or discrimination to the Superintendent at least once during each school year. The district is responsible for assuring that copies of each SSEC report, both individual and summary reports, are retained at the school until the youngest person involved in a reported incident is 27 years old. Individual incident report forms will not be kept in student cumulative folders nor sent to the next school or district that students attend. Confidentiality Any violent or disruptive incident or harassment, bullying, and discrimination report prepared in accordance with law will be available for inspection by the State Education Department upon request. All names and other personally identifiable information included in any report are confidential and must not be disclosed to any person for use by any person for purposes other than the reporting purposes in Education Law §2802, except as otherwise authorized by law. References Education Law §§10-18 (Dignity for All Students Act); 2802 (Uniform Violent Incident Reporting System) 8 NYCRR §100.2 (gg) (Uniform Violent Incident Reporting System) 8 NYCRR §185.15 (Appendix L) (Retention and Disposition Schedule LGS-1 for New York Local Government Records) NOTE: Refer also to Policy #0115, Student Harassment and Bullying Prevention and Intervention
