3430 – Uniform Violent and Disruptive Incident Reporting System (VADIR)

3430 – Uniform Violent and Disruptive Incident Reporting System (VADIR) Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 3430 – Uniform Violent and Disruptive Incident Reporting System (VADIR) June 20 , 2023 In compliance with the Uniform Violent and Disruptive Incident Reporting System (VADIR), the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District will record each violent or disruptive incident that occurs on school property or at a school function. School property shall mean in or within any building, structure, athletic playing field, playground, parking lot or land contained within the real property boundary line of a public elementary or secondary school; or in or on a school bus as defined in Vehicle and Traffic Law Section 142. A school function shall mean a school-sponsored or school-authorized extracurricular event or activity regardless of where such event or activity takes place, including any event or activity that may take place in another state. In accordance with the manner prescribed, the District will submit an annual report of violent and disruptive incidents (on the Summary of Violent and Disruptive Incidents form) from the previous school year to the Commissioner of Education. Summary data will be used to determine the rate of violent and disruptive incidents in each school and to identify schools as persistently dangerous, as required by the No Child Left Behind Act. The District will utilize the Individual Violent and Disruptive Incident Report form for the reporting of individual incidents by each building and/or program under its jurisdiction and for the tally count of incidents into the Summary Form. Copies of such incident reports will be retained for the time prescribed by the Commissioner in the applicable records retention schedule. These reports will be available for inspection by the State Education Department upon request. All personally identifiable information included in a violent or disruptive incident report will be confidential and will not be disclosed to any person for any purpose other than that specified in Education Law Section 2802, except as otherwise authorized by law. The District will include a summary of the District’s annual violent or disruptive incident report in its School District Report Card in the format prescribed by the Commissioner. Reporting Guidelines The District will utilize the New York State Education Department’s website to obtain copies of the forms, directions, glossary and additional information at website: http://www.emsc.nysed.gov/irs/ References Education Law Sections 2801(1) and 2802 Vehicle and Traffic Law Section 142 8 NYCRR Section 100.2 (gg)
