5250 – Sale and Disposal of School District Property

5250 – Sale and Disposal of School District Property Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 5250 – Sale and Disposal of School District Property June 20 , 2023 Sale of School Property No school property shall be sold without prior approval of the Board of Education. However, the responsibility for such sales may be delegated. The Board of Education may, by resolution, sell any piece of real property which the Board deems to be of no use or value to the District. Voter approval is not required to consummate the sale unless a petition, signed by at least ten percent (10%) of the voters, is received requesting such a referendum. The petition would then require the affirmative votes of the majority of the voters, before the Board may act. In any case, the Board of Education shall provide a thirty (30) day period between the approval of sale and the actual sale of the District property. The net proceeds from the sale of school property shall be deposited in the General Fund. Lease of School District Real Property The Board of Education is authorized to adopt a resolution providing that specific real property of the School District is not currently needed for District purposes and that the leasing of such real property is in the best interest of the School District. The Board may also lease an unused school building for a term not to exceed five (5) years. A lease in excess of five (5) years is permissible with voter approval by referendum. Disposal of District Personal Property Equipment School District equipment that is obsolete, surplus, or unusable by the District shall be disposed of in such a manner that is advantageous to the District. The Superintendent will be responsible for selling the equipment in such a way so as to maximize the net proceeds of sale which may include a bona fide public sale preceded by adequate public notice. If it is determined that reasonable attempts to dispose of the equipment have been made and such attempts have not produced an adequate return, the Superintendent or his/her designee may dispose of the equipment in any manner which he/she deems appropriate. Textbooks Textbooks may lose their value to the educational program because of changes in the curriculum or they contain outdated material and/or are in poor condition. If textbooks are no longer useful or usable, the procedures for disposal shall adhere to the following order of preference: Sale of textbooks. If reasonable attempts to dispose of surplus textbooks fail to produce monetary return to the School District; then Donation to charitable organizations; or Disposal as trash. References Education Law Sections 1604(4), 1604(30), 1604(36), 1709(9), 1709(11), 2503, 2511 and 2512 General Municipal Law Sections 51 and 800 et seq.
