5322 – Use of District-Owned Cell Phones

5322 – Use of District-Owned Cell Phones Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 5322 – Use of District-Owned Cell Phones June 20 , 2023 The Board of Education recognizes that certain District employees will be required to carry District-owned cell phones in order to assist them in meeting position responsibilities. Such phones shall be provided after considering other alternatives (e.g., pagers, radio) and determining that the cell phone is the most appropriate tool for the employee to utilize. A list of position titles utilizing District-owned cell phones shall be maintained in the Business Office and reported to the Board of Education for its approval each year at its reorganization meeting in July. The Board shall provide these employees with a cell phone plan that best aligns their job duties to the minutes per month that is most reasonable and appropriate to conduct their normal job duties. All cellular phone contracts shall be secured through the appropriate purchasing process and shall be subject to review and approval of the Board. Cell phones are to be used for School District business purposes. Personal use of cell phones beyond the monthly allotted minutes will be reimbursed to the District upon receipt of the monthly cell invoice. Excessive personal use or failure to follow these guidelines may result in revocation of the phone and discipline of the employee. As with any District-owned equipment, employees must take proper care of cell phones and take all reasonable precautions against damage, loss, or theft. Any damage, loss, or theft must be reported immediately to the Assistant Superintendent for Operations. Since employees are responsible for the safe return of District-owned cell phones, employees who use District-owned cell phones may be liable for damages or loss that occurs during the period of their use. At least once per year, the Assistant Superintendent for Operations shall evaluate and report to the Board on the cost and effectiveness of the District’s cellular telephone plan.
