5512 – Maintenance of Fund Balance

5512 – Maintenance of Fund Balance Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 5512 – Maintenance of Fund Balance August 21 , 2017 General Provisions The Board recognizes that the maintenance of a fund balance is essential to the financial integrity of the District insofar as it helps mitigate current and future risks and assists in ensuring stable tax rates. Consistent with this understanding, the Board adopts the following standards and practices. Classification of Funds The District will ensure that funds are classified consistent with Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) Statement Number 54, Fund Balance Reporting and Governmental Fund Type Definitions. Consequently, fund balance amounts will be categorized as non-spendable, restricted, committed, assigned, or unassigned. Unassigned Fund Balance Minimum Unassigned Fund Balance In order to maintain financial stability and protect against cash flow shortfalls, the Board will strive to maintain an unassigned fund balance at a level that is deemed fiscally responsible by the Board and the District’s Administration. Maximum Unassigned Fund Balance In order to support normal operating costs and provide fiscal stability for the District, the Board will also strive to ensure that the unassigned fund balance does not exceed 4% of the current year’s budgeted expenditures. If it is anticipated that such balance will exceed the 4% ceiling, the Board will evaluate current commitments and assignments in order to determine the final distribution of fund balance in any fiscal year. The District will ensure unexpended surplus funds are used to reduce taxpayer liability in conformance with Real Property Tax Law Section 1318. Fund Balance and Budget Development The District’s ability to maintain its unassigned fund balance within the limits articulated above is contingent upon the development of a reasonable budget. Consequently, the District will develop and adopt budgets that, to the extent possible, reflect the anticipated revenues and expenditures. Likewise, the District will ensure that appropriate reserve funds are established and utilized, consistent with applicable law and District policy, to ensure the fund balance is sufficient to meet District needs. Compliance The District will adhere to the reporting requirements of Article 3 of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York, and the practices set forth in GASB Statement Number 54. NOTE: Refer also to Policies: #5110 — Budget Planning and Development #5511 — Reserve Funds
