5572R – Audit Committee Charter

5572R – Audit Committee Charter Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 5572R – Audit Committee Charter January 28 , 2019 Audit Committee Authority Pursuant to a resolution, dated December 19, 2005 the Board of Education of the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District (the District) established an audit committee to assist the Board of Education in the oversight of both the internal and external audit functions. The requirement to create an audit committee was established by Education Law §2116-c. According to §2116(4), the role of an audit committee shall be advisory and any recommendations it provides to the Board shall not be substituted for any required review and acceptance by the Board of Education. Mission The Board of Education established an audit committee to provide independent assistance to the Board in the oversight of the following matters: Assist the Board in providing oversight of the internal and external audit functions, including the appointment of the internal and external auditors. Oversee the competitive Request for Proposal Process (RFP) used to solicit quotations for the District’s annual external audit. Review the scope, plan and coordination of the external audit. Review corrective action plans and necessary improvement based on audit findings and recommendations received from external and internal auditors. Provide a communications link between the external and internal auditors and the Board. Composition and Requisite Skills The District’s Audit Committee is comprised of at least three members. While members are appointed annually, it is important to stagger the terms of committee members. The committee shall include: Three Board of Education members for the first year, with consideration of adding other volunteer members from the community with requisite skills after the initial year of operation during the 2006-07 school year. Committee members collectively should possess the expertise and experience in accounting, auditing, financial reporting and school District finances needed to understand and evaluate the school District’s financial statements, the external audit of those statements and the District’s internal audit activities. Accordingly, the Audit Committee’s members should: Possess the requisite skills and experience necessary to understand technical and complex financial reporting issues. Have the ability to communicate with, and offer advice and assistance to, public finance officers and auditors. Be knowledgeable about internal controls, financial statement audits and management/operational audits. Duties and Responsibilities The duties and responsibilities of the District’s Audit Committee include the following: External Audit Focus Recommend selection of the external auditor to the Board of Education. Meet with the external auditor prior to commencement of the audit to review the engagement letter. Review and discuss with the external auditor any risk assessment of the District’s fiscal operations developed as part of the auditor’s responsibilities under governmental auditing standards for a financial statement audit and federal single audit standards, if applicable. Review the external auditor’s assessment of the District’s system of internal controls. Receive and review the draft annual audit report and accompanying draft management letter and, working directly with the external auditor, assist the Board of Education in interpreting such documents. Make a recommendation to the Board of Education on accepting the annual audit report. Review any corrective action plan developed by the school District and assist the Board of Education in the implementation of such plans. Internal Audit Focus Make recommendations to the Board of Education regarding the appointment of the internal auditor. Assist in the oversight of the internal audit function. Review the annual internal audit plan to ensure that high risk areas and key control activities are periodically evaluated and tested. Review the results of internal audit activities and significant recommendations and findings of the internal auditor. Monitor implementation of the internal auditor’s recommendations by management. Provide input on the performance evaluation of the internal auditor. Administrative Matters Hold regularly scheduled meetings. Administer other related duties as prescribed by the Board of Education. Review and revise the Audit Committee Charter. Membership The membership duties of the District Audit Committee include the following: Good Faith – Members of the Committee shall perform their duties in good faith, in a manner they reasonably believe to be in the best interests of the Committee and the District with such care as a generally prudent person in a similar position would use under similar circumstances. Confidentiality – During the exercise of duties and responsibilities, the Committee members may have access to confidential information. The Committee shall have an obligation to the District to maintain the confidentiality of such information. Oath of Office – All non-board members, who are members of the Audit Committee, should be administered the District’s oath of office by the District Clerk. Meetings and Notification The District Audit Committee shall meet a minimum of three (3) times each year. An agenda of each meeting should be clearly determined in advance and the Audit Committee should receive supporting documents in advance, for reasonable review and consideration. Any member of the Board of Education, who is not a member of the Audit Committee, may attend audit committee meetings if authorized by a resolution of the Board. The Audit Committee shall prepare minutes of each meeting. At a minimum, the minutes will include the following: Copies of the meeting agenda Date, attendance and location of the meeting Brief summary of the topics discussed Copies of materials discussed or presented at the meeting A record of all actions or recommendations agreed to by the committee Decision-Making Process All decisions shall be reached by consensus of those members present at the meeting. Consensus is defined as an acceptable solution that all can agree to support. If consensus cannot be reached, polling of the voting membership will take place and simple majority will rule. A quorum constitutes a simple majority of the total membership and meetings will not be conducted unless a quorum is present. Reporting Requirements The District Audit Committee has the duty and responsibility to report its activities to the Board of Education. Periodic written reports of Audit Committee activities are an important communication link between the Audit Committee and the Board on key decisions and responsibilities. The Audit Committee’s reporting requirements are to: Report on the scope and breadth of committee activities so that the Board of Education is kept informed of its work. Provide minutes of meetings and work sessions which clearly record the actions and recommendations of the Committee. Report on their review of the District’s draft annual audit report and accompanying management letter and their review of significant findings and recommendations of the internal auditor. Report on suspected fraud or abuse or material defects in the internal control systems. Report on material or significant non-compliances with laws or District policies and regulations. Report on any other matters that should be disclosed to the Board of Education. Review of the Charter The District Audit Committee shall assess and report to the Board of Education on the adequacy of this Charter no less than an annual basis or as necessary. Charter modifications, as recommended by the Audit Committee, should be presented to the Board of Education in writing for their review and action.
