5640 – Smoking, Tobacco, and Cannabis (Marijuana) Use

5640 – Smoking, Tobacco, and Cannabis (Marijuana) Use Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 5640 – Smoking, Tobacco, and Cannabis (Marijuana) Use July 19 , 2021 The following actions are prohibited on school grounds and at school functions: smoking; vaping; using tobacco products; and/or using or ingesting any form of cannabis. Smoking and vaping are prohibited within 100 feet of the entrances, exits, or outdoor areas of any of the District’s schools. However, this prohibition does not apply to smoking or vaping in a residence, or within the real property boundary lines of residential real property. Exceptions may exist for authorized medical cannabis use. Definitions For purposes of this policy, the following definitions apply: “Electronic cigarette” (or “e-cigarette”) means an electronic device delivering vapor inhaled by an individual user, and includes any refill, cartridge, and any other component of such a device. “School function” means a school-sponsored or school-authorized extracurricular event or activity regardless of where the event or activity takes place, including any event or activity that may take place virtually or in another state. “School grounds” means any building, structure, and surrounding outdoor grounds, including entrances or exits, contained within the District’s preschool, nursery school, elementary, or secondary school’s legally defined property boundaries as registered in the County Clerk’s Office, as well as any vehicles used to transport children or school personnel. “Smoking” means the burning of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other matter or substance containing tobacco, cannabis, or cannabinoid hemp. “Tobacco products” means cigarettes or cigars, bidis, chewing tobacco, powdered tobacco, nicotine water, or any other tobacco products. “Vaping” means the use of an electronic cigarette. Notification The District will prominently post signs prohibiting smoking and vaping on school grounds in accordance with applicable law. Appropriate District officials will inform individuals smoking or vaping in a non-smoking area that they are in violation of law and/or District policy. The District will communicate this policy to staff, students, parents/guardians, volunteers, visitors, contractors, and outside groups through means such as the District’s Code of Conduct, student handbooks, newsletters, announcements, facilities use forms/agreements, and/or the prominent display of this policy in appropriate locations. Prohibition of Tobacco Promotional Items/Tobacco Advertising Tobacco promotional items (e.g., brand names, logos, and other identifiers) are prohibited: On school grounds; In any vehicles used to transport students or school personnel; At school functions; In school publications; On clothing, shoes, accessories, gear, and school supplies in accordance with the District’s Code of Conduct and applicable collective bargaining agreements. This prohibition of tobacco promotional items will be enforced in accordance with the District’s Code of Conduct and applicable collective bargaining agreements. The District will request, whenever possible, tobacco free editions of periodical publications for school libraries and classroom use. References 20 USC §§ 6081-6084 and 7971-7974 41 USC § 8101 et seq. Education Law § 409 Penal Law § 222.10 Public Health Law §§ 1399-n, 1399-o, 1399-p, and 1399-aa 8 NYCRR §§ 155.5 and 156.3 NOTE: Refer also to Policies: #3280 — Use of School Facilities, Materials, and Equipment #6150 — Alcohol, Tobacco, Drugs, and Other Substances (Staff) #7320 — Alcohol, Tobacco, Drugs, and Other Substances (Students) #8240 — Instruction in Certain Subjects District Code of Conduct
