5650 – Energy Conservation and Recycling in the Schools

5650 – Energy Conservation and Recycling in the Schools Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 5650 – Energy Conservation and Recycling in the Schools June 20 , 2023 The Board of Education recognizes the importance of energy conservation and is committed to the analysis, development, and initiation of conservation measures throughout the District for the purpose of reducing energy consumption, particularly in these times of declining levels of natural energy resources and increasing cost of these resources. The Board maintains an aggressive and responsible program to reduce consumption of energy by its facilities and to provide education to both staff and students on the conservation of energy. The District is committed to an energy conservation program that addresses not only capital-related energy projects but ongoing, day-to-day energy related issues as well. All staff are urged to participate actively in a program of energy conservation by assisting in the efforts to eliminate the wasteful use of energy in the operation of the District’s buildings. Cooperation will be required of each employee and each student to achieve a meaningful energy conservation program that results in a more efficient use of energy resources. Involvement of staff and students is essential to a successful program of energy conservation. Energy Manager The Director of Facilities and Operations is designated as the Energy Manager of the District and he/she shall report directly to the Board of Education and the Superintendent, or their designee, on matters pertaining to energy conservation. Energy Conservation Task Force The Board of Education further directs the Superintendent to establish an energy conservation task force consisting of at least two Board members, the Superintendent, the School Business Official, the Director of Facilities and Operations, and such other individual(s) as may be deemed necessary. The duties of this task force will include, but are not limited to, the following: Analyzing the District’s energy consumption patterns and cost data; Selecting and recommending to the Board an energy audit or technical assistance study to determine where the District can save; Consider financing energy improvements with an energy performance contract. A technical assistance study can evaluate a proposed performance contract before the District enters into an agreement; Consider cost savings from cooperative purchasing arrangements with other municipalities and school districts. Work with outside consultants and/or staff members to recommend and evaluate energy saving ideas including, but not limited to, technology power management, lighting changes, HVAC changes; and Evaluate and make recommendations about the energy efficiency of District buildings through periodic building inspections and surveys. Progress reports on the implementation of energy conservation measures will be made to the Board at least annually. Minimum Indoor Air Temperature The District will comply with the Property Maintenance Code of New York State, part of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, which requires that indoor occupiable work spaces be maintained at a minimum temperature of sixty-five (65) degrees from September 14 to May 31 during the period the spaces are occupied. There are exceptions for areas of vigorous physical activities such as gymnasiums as well as processing spaces such as coolers or freezers. However, by law, code or regulation there is no maximum temperature specified. Ventilation requirements only require fresh air, not cool air-conditioning. Long-Range Considerations The energy conservation program is an important factor to be considered in planning effective use of school facilities, new construction, remodeling or rehabilitation programs, and modernization projects. Recycling The Board is committed to protecting and improving the environment by recycling commonly used materials, waste prevention strategies and purchasing recycled products when feasible. The Superintendent will create a task force charged with developing a program for the source separation and segregation of recyclable or reusable materials in the District. This District-wide recycling plan shall include: A conservation education program to teach students about their social responsibility for preserving our resources, and involvement of all students and personnel in a comprehensive effort to reduce, reuse and recycle waste materials; A concerted effort to purchase recycled and biodegradable items; Separation of waste into appropriate categories for the purposes of recycling; and A cooperative effort with community recycling programs. References Environmental Conservation Law Sections 27-2101- 27-2117 General Municipal Law Section 120-aa 19 New York State Code of Rules and Regulations (NYCRR) Sections 1221-1228 and Section 1240 Energy Conservation Code of New York State 2007
