5670 – Records Management

5670 – Records Management Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 5670 – Records Management February 22 , 2021 A Records Management Officer shall be designated by the Superintendent, subject to the approval of the Board of Education. Such Records Management Officer shall coordinate the development of and oversee a program for the orderly and efficient management of records, including the legal disposition or destruction of obsolete records, and shall be given the authority and responsibility to work with other local officials at all levels in the development and maintenance of the records management program. In addition, a Records Advisory Board may be created to assist in establishing and supporting the records management program. The District’s legal counsel, the fiscal officer, and the Superintendent/designee may comprise the Advisory Board. Retention and Disposition of Records The Superintendent shall retain records for such a period and dispose of them in the manner described in Records Retention and Disposition Schedule ED-1, established pursuant to Part 185, Title VIII of the Official Compilation of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New York and Article 57-A of the Arts and Cultural Affairs Law. Special Approvals for Disposition of Records Not Included in Schedule/Records Damaged by Natural or Manmade Disasters Records not listed on a records retention and disposition schedule shall not be disposed of without the approval of the Commissioner of Education. Records that have been damaged by natural or manmade disaster and constitute a human health or safety risk also require the Commissioner’s prior approval before disposition. Replacing Original Records with Microforms or Electronic Images Digital images of public records may be stored on electronic media, and such electronic records may replace paper originals or micrographic copies of these records. To ensure accessibility and intelligibility for the life of these records, the School District shall follow the procedures prescribed by the Commissioner of Education. Retention and Preservation of Electronic Records The District shall ensure that records retention requirements are incorporated into any plan and process for design, redesign, or substantial enhancement of an information system that stores electronic records. References Arts and Cultural Affairs Law Article 57-a 8 NYCRR Part 185
