5682 – Cardiac Automated External Defibrillators (AEDs) in Public School Facilities

5682 – Cardiac Automated External Defibrillators (AEDs) in Public School Facilities Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 5682 – Cardiac Automated External Defibrillators (AEDs) in Public School Facilities June 21 , 2023 The School District shall provide and maintain on-site in each instructional school facility functional cardiac automated external defibrillator (AED) equipment as defined in Public Health Law Section 3000-b for use during emergencies. Each such facility shall have sufficient automated external defibrillator equipment available to ensure ready and appropriate access for use during emergencies in quantities and types as deemed by the Commissioner of Education, in consultation with the Commissioner of Health. Determination of the quantity and placement of AEDs must be made with consideration of at least the factors enumerated in Commissioner’s Regulations. An instructional school facility means a building or other facility maintained by the School District where instruction is provided to students pursuant to its curriculum. Whenever an instructional School District facility is used for a school-sponsored or school-approved curricular or extracurricular event or activity and whenever a school-sponsored athletic contest is held at any location, the public school officials and administrators responsible for such school facility or athletic contest shall ensure that AED equipment is provided on-site and that there is present during such event, activity or contest at least one staff person who is trained in accordance with Public Health Law in the operation and use of an AED. School-sponsored or school-approved curricular or extracurricular events or activities mean events or activities of the School District that are, respectively, associated with its instructional curriculum or otherwise offered to its students. A school-sponsored athletic contest means an extraclass intramural athletic activity of instruction, practice and competition for students in grades 4 through 12 consistent with Commissioner’s Regulations Section 135.4. Where a school-sponsored competitive athletic event is held at a site other than a School District facility, School District officials shall assure that AED equipment is provided on-site by the sponsoring or host district and that at least one staff person who is trained, in accordance with Public Health Law, in the operation and use of the AED is present during such athletic event. A school-sponsored competitive athletic event means an extraclass interscholastic athletic activity of instruction, practice and competition for students in grades 7 through 12 consistent with Commissioner’s Regulations Section 135.4. School District facilities and District staff responsible for carrying out the duties enumerated in Education Law Section 917 are deemed a “public access defibrillation provider” as defined pursuant to Public Health Law Section 3000-b and subject to the Public Health Law requirements and limitations. Therefore, it is the policy of our School District to provide proper training requirements for District AED users, to ensure the immediate calling of 911 and/or the community equivalent ambulance dispatch entity whenever the AED is used, to ensure ready identification of the location of the AED units as enumerated in the District’s Public Access Defibrillation Collaborative Agreement. The District will provide for regular maintenance and checkout procedures of the AED unit(s) which meet or exceed manufacturer’s recommendations. Appropriate documentation will be maintained in accordance with law and/or regulation. Further, the District will participate in the required Quality Improvement Program as determined by the Regional Emergency Medical Services Council. The District shall post a sign or notice at the main entrance to the facility or building in which the AED unit(s) is stored, indicating the exact location where the unit(s) is stored or maintained on a regular basis. Pursuant to Public Health Law Sections 3000-a and 3000-b, the School District (as a public access defibrillation provider), or any employee or other agent of the School District who, in accordance with the provisions of law, voluntarily and without expectation of monetary compensation renders emergency medical or first aid treatment using an AED to a person who is unconscious, ill or injured, shall not be liable for damages for injury or death unless caused by gross negligence. References Education Law Section 917 Public Health Law Sections 3000-a and 3000-b 8 NYCRR Sections 135.4 and 136.4
