5720 – Transportation of Students

5720 – Transportation of Students Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 5720 – Transportation of Students March 20 , 2017 Public School Students Kindergarten through Grade 12 students residing in the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District are eligible for transportation. Transportation for full-day pre-Kindergarten will be considered on an annual basis. Requests for Transportation to and from Nonpublic Schools The parent or person in parental relation of a parochial or private school child residing in the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District who desires that the child be transported to a parochial or private school within a 15-mile radius outside of the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District during the next school year should submit a written request to the Superintendent no later than April 1 of the preceding year, or within 30 days of moving into the District. The District will publish the April 1 date in its school calendar and/or local newspaper as a reminder to parents of this deadline. No late request of a parent or person in parental relation shall be denied where a reasonable explanation is provided for the delay. Transportation to Nonpublic Schools on Holidays When a holiday falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the Board of Education may choose to close on Friday or Monday in observance of the holiday. Schools that close may provide pupil transportation. However, if the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District has not shared its calendar and informed nonpublic schools that it will not transport on the optional holiday, the District is required to provide pupil transportation services on that day to nonpublic schools that are open. Transportation for Nonpublic School Students with Disabilities who are Parentally Placed For students with disabilities (ages 5 through 21) who are parentally placed in nonpublic schools outside their district of residency, if special education services are to be provided to a student at a site other than the nonpublic school, the school district of location is responsible for providing the special education services, including, as applicable, arranging and providing transportation necessary for the student to receive special education services. The proportionate share of IDEA Part B dollars could be used for such purpose. The school district of residence remains responsible to provide transportation to parentally placed nonpublic school students from the student’s home to the nonpublic school. Transportation of Students with Disabilities Students with disabilities in the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District will be transported up to 50 miles (one way) from their home to the appropriate special service or program, unless the Commissioner certifies that no appropriate nonresidential special service or program is available within 50 miles. The Commissioner may then establish transportation arrangements. Student Information Any mode of transportation used on a regular basis to transport students with a disability on a regularly scheduled route shall, upon written consent of the parent or person in parental relation, have maintained on such mode of transportation the following information about each student being transported: a) Student’s name; b) Nature of the student’s disability; c) Name of the student’s parent, guardian or person in a position of loco parentis (person in parental relation) and one or more telephone numbers where such person can be reached in an emergency; and/or d) Name and telephone number of any other person designated by such parent, guardian or person in a position of loco parentis as a person who can be contacted in an emergency. Such information will be used solely for the purpose of contacting the student’s parent, guardian, person in a position of loco parentis, or designee in the event of an emergency involving the student, shall be kept in a manner which retains the privacy of the student, and shall not be accessible to any person other than the driver or a teacher acting in a supervisory capacity. In the event that the driver or teacher is incapacitated, such information may be accessed by any emergency service provider for such purpose. Such information will be updated as needed, but at least once each school year and shall be destroyed if parental consent is revoked, the student no longer attends such school, or the disability no longer exists. Herein the term “disability” shall mean a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of the student, whether of a temporary or permanent nature. Fire Extinguishers School buses manufactured on or after January 1, 1990 fueled with other than diesel fuel and used to transport three or more students who use wheelchairs or other assistive mobility devices or with a total capacity of more than eight passengers and used to transport such students will be equipped with an automatic engine fire extinguishing system. School buses manufactured on or after September 1, 2007 fueled with diesel fuel and used to transport three or more students who use wheelchairs or other assistive mobility devices or with a total capacity of more than eight passengers used to transport such students will be equipped with an automatic engine fire extinguishing system. The purchase of automatic engine fire extinguishing systems for school buses used to transport such students will be deemed a proper school district expense. Transportation of Non-Resident Students Non-resident families must provide their own transportation. Transportation to School Sponsored Events Where the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District has provided transportation to students enrolled in the District to a school sponsored field trip, extracurricular activity or any other similar event, it will provide transportation back to either the point of departure or to the appropriate school in the District unless the parent or legal guardian of a student participating in such event has provided the District with written notice, consistent with District policy, authorizing an alternative form of return transportation for the student or unless intervening circumstances make such transportation impractical. In cases where intervening circumstances make transportation of a student back to the point of departure or to the appropriate school in the District impractical, a representative of the School District will remain with the student until the student’s parent or legal guardian has been contacted and informed of the intervening circumstances which make the transportation impractical; and the student has been delivered to his or her parent or legal guardian. Transportation in Personal Vehicles Personal cars of teachers and staff will not be used to transport students except in the event of extenuating circumstances and authorized by the administration. Authority To Transport The Superintendent is hereby delegated the authority for review and approval of transportation requests. Should the application be denied by the Superintendent, the applicant may seek review by filing an appeal with the Board of Education within 15 days of the written decision of the Superintendent. References Education Law Sections 1604, 1709, 1804, 1903, 1950, 2503, 2554, 2590-e, 3242, 3602-c, 3621(15), 3623-a(2c), 3635, 4401-a, 4401(4), 4402, 4404, 4405, and 4410-6 Vehicle and Traffic Law Section 375(20)(1) and 375(21-i) NOTE: Refer also to Policy #7131 — Education of Homeless Children and Youth
