5730 – School Bus Safety Program

5730 – School Bus Safety Program Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 5730 – School Bus Safety Program December 19 , 2016 The safe transportation of students to and from school is of primary concern in the administration of the school bus program. All state laws and regulations pertaining to the safe use of school buses shall be observed by drivers, students and school personnel. To assure the safety and security of students boarding or exiting school buses on school property, it shall be unlawful for a driver of a vehicle to pass a stopped school bus when the red bus signal is in operation. Use of Cell Phones and Portable Electronic Devices Prohibited Use of portable electronic devices by a school bus driver at times the vehicle is in operation on the roadway poses a potential safety risk. All school bus drivers are prohibited from using portable electronic devices while the bus is in operation. Personal cell phones are to be placed in the “off” position when in the possession of the school bus driver while the bus is in operation. Cell phones may be used in case of emergency. The following terms are defined as: “Portable electronic device” shall mean any mobile telephone (hand held or “hands free”), personal digital assistant (PDA), portable device with mobile data access, laptop computer, pager, broadband personal communication device, two-way messaging device, electronic game, or portable computing device. “Using” shall mean holding a portable electronic device while viewing, taking or transmitting images, playing games, or composing, sending, reading, viewing, accessing, browsing, transmitting, saving or retrieving email, text messages, or other electronic data. “Using” shall also mean engaging in the previously mentioned activities via a hands free device. “In operation” shall mean that the bus engine is running, whether in motion or not. The Transportation Supervisor, in cooperation with the Assistant Superintendent, has the responsibility of developing and publishing safety rules to be followed by drivers and passengers, including rules of student conduct. In order to ensure maximum safety to those riding school buses, it is necessary that students and drivers cooperate in this effort. There is no substitute for training to develop safe habits in pedestrian and vehicular traffic. All buses and other vehicles owned and operated by the School District will have frequent safety inspections, and will be serviced regularly. The Transportation Supervisor will maintain a comprehensive record of all maintenance performed on each vehicle. Every bus driver is required to report promptly any school bus accident involving death, injury, or property damage. All accidents, regardless of damage involved, must be promptly reported to the Transportation Supervisor. References Education Law Section 3623 Vehicle and Traffic Law Sections 509-a(7), 509-1(1-b), 1174(a), 1174(b) and 1225-c 8 NYCRR Section 156.3 NOTE: Refer also to Policies: #5683 — Fire and Emergency Drills, Bomb Threats and Bus Emergency Drills #5741 — Drug and Alcohol Testing for School Bus Drivers and Other Safety-Sensitive Employees
