6130 – Evaluation of Personnel

6130 – Evaluation of Personnel Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 6130 – Evaluation of Personnel January 23 , 2017 All Staff Members The administration will undertake a continuous program of supervision and evaluation of all personnel, including support staff, in the District. The primary purposes of the evaluations shall be to encourage and promote improved performance and to make decisions about the occupancy of positions. Teachers and Administrators The Broadalbin-Perth Central School District is committed to supporting the development of effective teachers and administrators. To this end, the District will provide procedures for the evaluation of all professional staff. District plans for Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) of teachers and principals will be developed in accordance with applicable laws, Commissioner’s regulations, and Rules of the Board of Regents. The primary purposes of these evaluations are: To encourage and promote improved performance; To guide professional development efforts; and To provide a basis for evaluative judgments by applicable school officials. APPR Ratings For those teachers and Principals subject to Education Law 3012-d, the Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) will result in a single composite effectiveness score and a rating of “highly effective,” “effective,” “developing,” or “ineffective.” The composite score will be determined as follows: 20% – student growth on state assessments or a comparable measure of student achievement growth (increases to 25% upon implementation of a value-added growth model); 20% – locally selected measures of student achievement that are determined to be rigorous and comparable across classrooms as defined by the Commissioner (decreases to 15% upon implementation of a value-added growth model); and 60% – other measures of teacher/Principal effectiveness consistent with standards prescribed by the Commissioner in regulation. The ratings scale based on composite scores has been established as follows: Highly Effective = composite effectiveness score of 91-100 Effective = composite effectiveness score of 75-90 Developing = composite effectiveness score of 65-74 Ineffective = composite effectiveness score of 0-64. If a teacher or Principal is rated “developing” or “ineffective,” the School District will develop and implement a teacher or Principal improvement plan (TIP) or (PIP). Tenured teachers and Principals with a pattern of ineffective teaching or performance, defined as two consecutive annual “ineffective” ratings, may be charged with incompetence and considered for termination through an expedited hearing process. The School District will ensure that all evaluators are appropriately trained consistent with standards prescribed by the Commissioner and that an appeals procedure is locally developed. Disclosure of APPR Consistent with Chapter 68 of the Laws of 2012, which amends Education Law 3012-d, the Commissioner is required to disclose professional performance review data for teachers and Principals on the New York State Education Department (NYSED) website and in any other manner to make such data widely available to the public. However, the release of such aggregate data may not include personally identifiable information for any teacher or Principal. Such public disclosure of final quality ratings and composite effectiveness scores will be suitable for research, analysis and comparison of APPR data for teachers and Principals across the state. Upon request, the District will release to parents/legal guardians the final quality ratings and composite effectiveness scores for teachers and Principals to which their student is currently assigned. The District’s obligation to disclose this information is limited to those teachers and Building Principals subject to Education Law 3012-c. The District will provide conspicuous notice to parents/legal guardians of their right to obtain such information and the methods by which the data can be obtained. Upon request, parents will receive an oral or written explanation of the composite effectiveness scoring ranges for final quality ratings and be offered the opportunity to understand such scores in the context of teacher evaluation and student performance. When a request for this information is received, reasonable efforts will be made to verify that it is a bona fide request by a parent/legal guardian entitled to review the data. Annual professional performance reviews of individual teachers and Principals shall not be subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information Law (FOIL). References Education Law §§ 3012-c, 3012-d Public Officers Law §§ 87 and 89 8 NYCRR §§ 80-1.1 and 100.2(o)
