6140 – Employee Medical Examinations

6140 – Employee Medical Examinations Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 6140 – Employee Medical Examinations June 21 , 2023 Pre-employment Medical Examinations In accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended, the School District shall not require applicants for positions to undergo a medical examination prior to an offer of employment. Further, the District shall not make inquiries of a job applicant as to whether the applicant is an individual with a disability or as to the nature or severity of a disability. However, the District may make pre-employment inquiries into the ability of an applicant to perform job-related functions. Employment Entrance Examinations The Board reserves the right to request a medical examination at any time during employment, at School District expense, in order to determine whether any employee can perform the essential functions of the position with or without reasonable accommodation. Annual or more frequent examinations of any employee may be required, when, in the judgment of the school physician/nurse practitioner and the Superintendent, such procedure is deemed necessary. All bus drivers and substitute bus drivers shall have yearly physical examinations. Each bus driver initially employed by the School District shall have a physical examination within the four (4) weeks prior to the beginning of service. In no case shall the interval between physical examinations exceed a thirteen-month period. The final acceptance or rejection of a medical report with reference to the health of an employee lies within the discretion of the Board. The decision of the physician designated by the Board as the determining physician shall take precedence over all other medical advice. All medical and health related information will be kept in accordance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). Examinations and Inquiries Acceptable The District may conduct voluntary medical examinations, including voluntary medical histories, which are part of an employee health program available to employees at that work site. The District may make inquiries into the ability of an employee to perform job-related functions. Prohibited The District shall not require a medical examination and shall not make inquiries as to whether such employee is an individual with a disability or as to the nature or severity of the disability, unless the examination or inquiry is shown to be job related and consistent with business necessity. References Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act (ADAAA) of 2008, Public Law 110-325) Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), Public Law 104-191 45 CFR Parts 160 and 164 Education Law Sections 913 and 3624 8 NYCRR Section 156.3(2) 10 NYCRR Part 14 15 NYCRR Part 6
