6160 – Professional Growth/Staff Development

6160 – Professional Growth/Staff Development Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 6160 – Professional Growth/Staff Development January 24 , 2022 It is the policy of the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District that attention be given to in-service, pre-service, and other staff development programs which are believed to be of benefit to the School District and its students. The Superintendent, in consultation with the appropriate administrative staff and/or teacher committees, is directed to arrange in-service programs and other staff development opportunities which will provide for the selection of subjects pertinent to the curriculum in the schools, to build from these subjects those topics or courses for in-service or staff development which will help employees acquire new methods of performing their job responsibilities or help staff improve on those techniques which are already being used in the schools, with the objective of improving professional competencies. It is recommended that administration develop meaningful in-service and/or staff development programs which will achieve the following: Contribute to the instructional program of the schools; Contribute to the health and wellness of students and staff; Contribute to improved education for students; Achieve state mandates; and Enhance the professional competencies and/or instructional abilities of staff members. The Board of Education, therefore, encourages all employees to improve their competencies beyond that which they may obtain through the regular performance of their assigned duties. Opportunities should be provided for: Planned in-service programs, courses, seminars, and workshops offered both within the School System and outside the District. Visits to other classrooms and schools, as well as attendance at professional meetings, for the purpose of improving instruction and/or educational services. Orientation/re-orientation of staff members to program and/or organizational changes as well as District expectations. Attendance at such professional development programs must be directly linked to the duties and responsibilities comprising the job description of the employee. Consequently, employees are encouraged to participate in the planning of staff development programs designed to meet their specific needs. Members of the staff are also encouraged to continue their formal education as well as to attend their respective work-related workshops, conferences and meetings. Funds for participating at such conferences, conventions, and other similar professional development programs will be budgeted for by the Board of Education on an annual basis. Reimbursement to District staff for all actual and necessary registration fees, expenses of travel, meals and lodging, and all necessary tuition fees incurred in connection with attendance at conferences and the like will be in accordance with established regulations for conference attendance and expense reimbursement. The Superintendent of Schools or their designee has authority to approve release time and expenses for staff members’ attendance at professional training conferences, study councils, in-service courses, workshops, summer study grants, school visitations, professional organizations and the like within budgetary constraints. A conference request form/course approval form must be submitted by the employee and approved by the designated administrator prior to the employee’s attendance at such conference or other professional development program. Mentoring Programs for First Year Teachers First year teachers must participate in a mentoring program as a component of the School District’s Professional Development Plan. The purpose of the mentoring program is to increase the retention of new teachers and improve their ability to assist students in attaining State learning standards. The mentor’s role is to provide guidance and support to a new teacher. However, additional mentor responsibilities may be negotiated and reflected in a collective bargaining agreement. References Education Law Sections 1604(27), 3004 and 3006 General Municipal Law Sections 77-b and 77-c 8 NYCRR Sections 52.21(b)(3)(xvi), 52.21(b)(3)(xvii), 80-3.4(b)(2), 80-5.13, 80-5.14 and 100.2(dd) NOTE: Refer also to Policy #6213 — Registration and Professional Development
