6170 – Fingerprinting Clearance of New Hires

6170 – Fingerprinting Clearance of New Hires Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 6170 – Fingerprinting Clearance of New Hires June 21 , 2023 Unless otherwise authorized, the District will not employ or utilize a prospective school employee unless the prospective school employee has been granted “full” clearance for employment by the State Education Department (SED). The District will require a prospective school employee who is not in the SED criminal history file database to undergo a fingerprint supported criminal history record background check. “Criminal history record” means a record of all criminal convictions and any pending criminal charges maintained on an individual by the Division of Criminal Justice Services (DCJS) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). The District will obtain the applicant’s consent to the criminal history records search. The SED joined the Statewide Vendor Management System (SVMS) operated by MorphoTrust in conjunction with DCJS for the capture and transmission of the fingerprint application, fee, and digital fingerprint images. The District will use the SVMS as directed by SED. The District will still request clearance for employment, view information regarding an applicant’s status, and enter hire or termination dates through SED’s Web-based application known as TEACH. Safety of Students The District will develop internal building and/or program procedures to help ensure the safety of students who have contact with an employee holding conditional appointment or emergency conditional appointment. These procedures will address the safety of students in the classroom, students attending off-campus activities under the supervision of the District, and students participating in extracurricular and/or co-curricular activities (including sports and athletic activities). Safety procedures to be addressed include, but are not limited to supervision of the employee holding conditional appointment or emergency conditional appointment as determined appropriate by the applicable building or program administrator and periodic visitations by the building or program administrator to the classroom, program, and/or activity assigned to the employee holding conditional appointment/emergency conditional appointment. References Correction Law Article 23-A Education Law §§ 305(30), 305(33), 1604, 1709, 1804, 1950, 2503, 2554, 2590-h, 2854, 3004-b, 3004-c and 3035 Executive Law § 296(16) Social Services Law Article 5, Title 9-B 8 NYCRR § 80-1.11 and Part 87
