6213 – Registration and Professional Development

6213 – Registration and Professional Development Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 6213 – Registration and Professional Development June 21 , 2023 Registration All employees holding a lifetime certificate in classroom teaching, teaching assistant, or educational leadership service (school building leader, school district leader, or school district business leader) must register with the State Education Department (SED) every five years through the TEACH system. Only registered employees may teach or supervise in the District. Teachers and administrators with a permanent, professional, or a Level III teaching assistant certificate issued before July 1, 2016 must apply for initial registration during the 2016-2017 school year during their birth month. These certificate holders must thereafter renew their registration every five years during their birth month. Teachers and administrators with a professional or a Level III teaching assistant certificate issued on or after July 1, 2016 will be automatically registered. These certificate holders must thereafter renew their registration every five years during their birth month. Certificate holders who do not timely register may not be employed and may be subject to monthly late fees after the first, transitional five-year registration period. Employees who change their name or address must also update SED within 180 days through the TEACH system. Continuing Teacher and Leader Education (CTLE) Credit Hours All District teachers and educational leaders with a professional or Level III teaching assistant certificate must complete 100 hours of acceptable CTLE during each five-year registration period to maintain a valid certificate. This requirement may be completed at any time over the course of a five-year period. Credit hours cannot carry over, however, to subsequent registration periods. SED sets high standards for courses, programs, and activities that qualify for CTLE credit, and it must approve all CTLE sponsors. Generally, acceptable CTLE will be in the content area of any certificate title held by an individual or in pedagogy. Further, the CTLE will be aligned with professional development standards created by the New York Professional Standards and Practices Board for Teaching. The District will describe opportunities for teachers and administrators to engage in CTLE in its Professional Development Plan. The District will provide CTLE opportunities that improve student performance and the teacher’s or administrator’s pedagogical or leadership skills, and that promote professionalism. A peer-review teacher or principal acting as an independent trained evaluator who conducts a classroom observation as part of a teacher evaluation under relevant sections of the Education Law may apply the observation time to fulfilling CTLE requirements. Time spent mentoring may also be counted toward required CTLE credit hours. Language Acquisition CTLE and Exemption Employees holding an English to speakers of other languages certificate or bilingual extension annotations are required to complete 50 CTLE hours in language acquisition aligned with the core content area of instruction taught, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learner (ELL) students. All other certificate holders must complete at least 15 CTLE hours dedicated to language acquisition addressing the needs of ELLs, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Employees holding a Level III teaching assistant certificate must complete at least 15 CTLE hours in language acquisition addressing the needs of ELLs and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Employees may be eligible for a waiver of language acquisition CTLE requirements. Each school year when there are fewer than 30 ELL students enrolled in the District or ELLs make up less than 5% of the total student population, the District may obtain an exemption. If the District obtains this exemption, employees would be exempt from the language acquisition CTLE requirement for each year that they are employed in the District. CTLE Adjustments The Commissioner may adjust an employee’s number of CTLE hours or time to complete them due to poor health, as certified by a health-care provider; extended active duty in the Armed Forces; or other acceptable good cause. Any employee who obtains certification from the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards will be considered CTLE-compliant for the registration period in which he or she obtains this certification. The employee must still meet any language acquisition requirements, however. Recordkeeping and Reporting Requirements Employees must maintain a record of completed CTLE for at least three years from the end of the applicable registration period. The District will maintain a record of any professional development it conducts or provides for at least seven years from the date of completion. The District will also submit all required reports to SED each year. References Education Law §§ 3006, 3006-a, 3012-d 8 NYCRR §§ 80-6, 100.2(dd) NOTE: Refer also to Policy #6160 — Professional Growth/Staff Development
