6215 – Probation and Tenure

6215 – Probation and Tenure Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 6215 – Probation and Tenure March 20 , 2017 Probation Certified staff members will be appointed to a probationary period by a majority vote of the Board of Education upon recommendation of the Superintendent of Schools. Effective July 1, 2015, full-time certified staff members shall be appointed to a probationary period of four (4) years. However, the probationary period shall not exceed three (3) years for teachers previously appointed to tenure in this or another school district or BOCES within the state, provided the teacher was not dismissed from the former district. Additionally, up to two (2) years of service as a regular substitute teacher may be applied toward probationary service. This is sometimes referred to as Jarema Credit. During the probationary period, a staff member will be given assistance in adjusting to the new position, but the essential qualifications for acceptable performance shall be assumed because of the possession by the staff member of the required certification or license. Tenure At the expiration of the probationary period or within the timeframes designated in any applicable CBA, the Superintendent shall make a written report to the Board recommending for appointment to tenure those certified staff members successfully completing a probationary period in the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District. The Board may then by a majority vote appoint on tenure any or all of the persons recommended by the Superintendent. The Board will follow all applicable statutes regarding tenure. Resolutions Making Appointments Each resolution making a probationary appointment or an appointment on tenure will specify: The name of the appointee; The tenure area or areas in which the professional educator will devote a substantial portion of his/her time; The date of commencement of probationary service or service on tenure in each such area; The expiration date of the appointment, if made on a probationary basis; and The certification status of the appointee in reference to the position to which the individual is appointed. References Education Law Sections 2509, 3012 and 3031 8 NYCRR Part 30
