6220 – Temporary Personnel

6220 – Temporary Personnel Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 6220 – Temporary Personnel June 21 , 2023 The District’s needs sometimes require temporary appointments. The terms of these appointments will be defined by the Board on a case-by-case basis. Student Teachers The District will cooperate with teacher training institutions in the placement of student teachers to provide beginning teachers with the best possible student teaching experience. Schools are required to allow student teachers to videotape themselves providing instruction in a classroom to meet part of their performance assessment requirements for teaching certification. The video must remain confidential, is a confidential record of the New York State Education Department (SED), and is not subject to viewing or disclosure to an individual or entity other than the student teacher applicant and relevant SED personnel. Student teachers will be protected from liability for negligence or other acts resulting in accidental injury to any person by the District, as provided by law. Substitute Teachers A fully qualified substitute teacher will be employed, whenever possible, by the Superintendent in the absence of a regular teacher. It is recognized that fully certified persons will not always be available for employment as substitute teachers. Eligibility for Service There are three categories of substitutes: Substitutes with valid teaching certificates or certificates of qualification may serve in any capacity for any number of days. If employed on more than an itinerant basis, these substitutes will be employed in their certification area. Substitutes without a valid certificate, but who are completing collegiate study towards certification at the rate of not less than six semester hours per year may serve in any capacity for any number of days, in any number of school districts. If employed on more than an itinerant basis, these substitutes will be employed in their anticipated certification area. Substitutes without a valid certificate and who are not working toward certification may serve for no more than 40 days per school year. In extreme circumstances—where there is an urgent need for a substitute teacher—however, the District may employ this substitute teacher beyond the 40-day limit, for up to an additional 50 days (90 days total in a school year), if the Superintendent certifies that the District conducted a good-faith recruitment search and there are no certified teachers available who can perform the duties of the position. In even more rare circumstances, the District may hire this substitute teacher beyond the 90 days only if the Superintendent attests that the District conducted a good-faith recruitment search, but there are still no certified teachers available who can perform the duties of the position and that the District needs a particular substitute teacher to work with a specific class or group of students until the end of the school year. The Board will annually establish the ordinary rate for per diem substitute teachers. Reporting The Superintendent will submit an annual report to the Commissioner concerning the employment of all uncertified teachers. The report will include: The number of substitute teachers authorized to be employed beyond the 40-day limit. The number of substitute teachers authorized to be employed beyond the 90-day limit. The required good-faith recruitment certifications for all teachers employed beyond the 40-day and 90-day limits. References Education Law § 3023 8 NYCRR §§ 80-1.5 and 80-5.4
