7121 – Diagnostic Screening of Students

7121 – Diagnostic Screening of Students Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 7121 – Diagnostic Screening of Students June 21 , 2023 The District has developed a plan for the diagnostic screening of all new entrants and students with low test scores to determine whether such students have or are suspected of having a disability, are possibly gifted, or are possibly English Language Learners (ELLs). The results of the diagnostic screening will be contained in a written report that will be shared with the parent. A new entrant means a student entering the New York State public school system, pre-kindergarten through grade 12, for the first time, or re-entering a New York State public school with no available record of a prior screening. Students with low test scores are students who score below level two on either the third grade English language arts or mathematics assessment for New York State elementary schools. The diagnostic screening will be conducted: By persons appropriately trained or qualified; By persons appropriately trained or qualified in the student’s home language if the language of the home is other than English; In the case of new entrants, prior to the school year, if possible, but no later than December 1 of the school year of entry or within 15 days of transfer of a student into a New York State public school should the entry take place after December 1 of the school year; In the case of students with low test scores, within 30 days of the availability of the test scores. No screening examination for vision, hearing, or scoliosis condition is required where a student, parent, or person in parental relation objects on the grounds that the examination conflicts with their genuine and sincere religious beliefs. Results and Reports The results of the diagnostic screening will be reviewed and a written report of each student screened will be prepared by appropriately qualified District staff. If the screening indicates a possible disability, a possibly gifted child, or a child identified as possibly being an ELL, the District will refer the child for the appropriate programs or services. Parents or guardians of children to be screened will receive information in advance regarding the purpose of screening, the areas to be screened and the referral process. The information will be communicated either orally or in writing in a language that the parent or guardian can understand. Upon request, the District will provide parents or guardians with the written results of their child’s performance on screenings. The results of all mandated screening examinations will be provided to the child’s parent or guardian and to any teacher of the child within the school while the child is enrolled. A letter will be sent to the parent or guardian of any child who fails a screening. Confidentiality of Information All information collected about a child through the screening program will be kept confidential. References Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, 20 USC § 1232(g) Education Law §§ 901, 903, 904, 905, 914, and 3208(5) Public Health Law § 2164 8 NYCRR Parts 117, 136, 142.2, and 154 NOTE: Refer also to Policies: #7131 — Education of Homeless Children and Youth #7512 — Student Physicals #8240 — Instructional Programs: Driver Education, Gifted and Talented Education and Physical Education
