7140 – School Census

7140 – School Census Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 7140 – School Census June 21 , 2023 Although not required by law, the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District will take a census of all children from birth to eighteen (18) years of age. Census data shall be reported as required by law. The census must indicate the names of all children between birth and eighteen (18) years of age, and of children with disabilities between birth and twenty-one (21) years of age; their respective residences by street and number; the day of the month and the year of their birth; the names of the parents/persons in parental relation to them; such information relating to physical or mental disabilities, to illiteracy, to employment and to the enforcement of the law relating to child labor and compulsory education as the State Education Department and the Board of Education shall require; and also such further information as the Board shall require. On written request and in such form as prescribed by the Commissioner of Education, the Board shall provide to the Commissioner a report containing the names, ages and addresses of those children who are blind or deaf, and those children having serious physical or mental disabilities. Additionally, such report shall further indicate whether such children are being educated within the public schools of the District or, if they are not, where such education is being furnished to them. Parents/persons in parental relation to those children within the prescribed census age ranges are to make such reports as the Board of Education shall require, including, but not limited to, providing two (2) weeks before the child reaches compulsory school age, the name of the child; the child’s residence; the name of the person or persons in parental relation to the child; the name and location of the school to which the child shall have been or shall be sent as a student; and such other information as required by law or as the Board may require. A parent, guardian or other person having under his/her control or charge a child between birth and eighteen (18) years of age who withholds or refuses to give information in his/her possession relating to such census data as required by law pertaining to the child; or, in the alternative, gives false information in relation to such census data, shall be liable to and punished by a fine or imprisonment as established by law. Count of Immigrant Children and Youth As a provision of the federal Title III Part A – English Language Acquisition, Language Enhancement, and Academic Achievement Act under the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001, the U.S. Secretary of Education requires that all local educational agencies (LEAs) count the number of “immigrant children and youth” enrolled in the public and nonpublic schools in the geographic area under the jurisdiction of, or served by, the LEA. The results of this count have important implications for the receipt of supplemental federal funds to eligible LEAs in New York State for services to recently arrived immigrant children and youth. For purposes of this count, the term “immigrant children and youth” shall include those individuals who: Are ages three (3) through twenty-one (21); Were NOT born in any state or from the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia, Guam, American Samoa, the U.S. Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, or the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands; and Have NOT been attending schools in any one or more States for more than three (3) full academic years. Each nonpublic school shall report its data to the public school district in which it is located. It is the responsibility of each public school district to report its immigrant count as well as the counts for all nonpublic schools within its jurisdiction. In accordance with law, the District shall conduct its survey and submit the information electronically to the New York State Education Department by the specified deadline date. LEAs must also maintain on file a list of the immigrant students counted, their countries of origin, dates of arrival, and the public or nonpublic school in which they are registered as well as copies of the letter to each of the nonpublic schools in its jurisdiction regarding the count. References 20 USC Section 6811 Education Law Sections 3240-3243 and 4402(1)(a) 8 NYCRR Section 200.2(a) NOTE: Refer also to Policy #7650 — Identification and Register of Children with Disabilities (Child Find)
