7150 – Remote Learning

7150 – Remote Learning Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 7150 – Remote Learning January 25 , 2021 Use of Remote Learning in the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District The Broadalbin-Perth Central School District (“District”) may offer remote or distance learning to students at certain times including, but not limited to, independent study, enrichment courses, and in the event of an extraordinary circumstance such as widespread illness, natural disaster, or other emergency situation. When making decisions about remote learning, the District will consult with students, parents, teachers, administrators, community members, and other stakeholders as appropriate. The District will also ensure that it is complying with applicable teaching and learning requirements. Extraordinary Circumstances In the event of an extraordinary circumstance that requires long-term and widespread use of remote learning, a plan will be developed that outlines how the District will accomplish remote learning. This plan will outline the number of students involved, modes of remote learning, asynchronous and synchronous learning opportunities, internet and device access among students, and alternatives available for students who have neither a device nor consistent access. It will also address the needs of different populations of students including, but not limited to, vulnerable students, younger students, students with disabilities, and English language learners. If warranted, the District may use a hybrid model of in-person instruction and remote learning. Formats and Methods of Remote Learning Remote learning may be delivered by teachers through a variety of formats and methods. Instruction may be provided through video, audio, and/or written materials. Communication between teachers and students may occur through video conferencing, prerecorded videos, online discussion boards, and/or other instruction that relies on technology. Remote learning can occur synchronously, which involves real-time interaction and collaboration between teachers and students, or asynchronously, which involves delayed interactions between teachers and students and self-directed learning. Determinations about how to best deliver remote learning will take into account a variety of factors including, but not limited to, the number of students involved, the subject matter, the students’ grade levels, and technological resources of both the District and students. Consideration will also be given to whether accommodations need to be made for students with disabilities or English language learners. Remote Learning Support As necessary, the District will provide instruction on using remote learning technology and IT support for students, teachers, and families. The District will also work to ensure that teachers and administrators are provided with professional development opportunities related to designing an effective remote learning experience. Compliance with District Policies, Procedures, and the Code of Conduct Teachers and students are required to comply with any and all applicable District policies, procedures, and other related documents as they normally would for in-person instruction. Examples include, but are not limited to, the District’s policies and procedures on non-discrimination and anti-harassment, acceptable use, and copyright. Students will also be required to abide by the rules contained within the Code of Conduct at all times while engaged in remote learning. Violations of the Code of Conduct and/or engaging in prohibited conduct may result in disciplinary action as warranted. Privacy and Security of Student and Teacher Data In compliance with law, regulation, and District policy, the District will take measures to protect the personal information of students and teachers from unauthorized access when using remote learning technologies. Examples of these measures include, but are not limited to, minimizing the amount of data shared to only that which is necessary, deidentifying data, and the use of encryption or an equivalent technical control that renders personally identifiable information unusable, unreadable, or indecipherable to unauthorized persons when transmitted electronically.
