7210 – Student Evaluation, Promotion and Placement

7210 – Student Evaluation, Promotion and Placement Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 7210 – Student Evaluation, Promotion and Placement February 23 , 2026 Grade Promotion and Placement Grade promotion and the placement of students within the District’s instructional system will be at the discretion of the school administration and will be subject to review at any time. In making these decisions, the administrator or building principal will be guided by: a student’s conceptual proficiency of those standards required at each grade; performance in class; past records, including various measures of student growth; recommendations from parents, persons in parental relation to District students, and teachers; and any other appropriate sources of information. With regard to student placement decisions, parents or persons in parental relation to District students may submit written requests for teacher attributes that would best serve their child’s learning needs; however, requests for specific teachers will not be honored. Elementary Promotion and Retention of Students Promotion and retention decisions are made with the intention of placing a student at the level that best supports continued growth and success. Determining factors may include, but are not limited to, teacher observation, standards based assessment, local assessment, social/emotional development, parental concerns, previous retention, and student age. In addition, a retention rating scale may be administered. The final decision for promotion or retention shall be made by the building leader and a plan must be developed and implemented to ensure that appropriate supports are provided to the student. Rules Governing Retention or Assignment of an Elementary Student The school will notify parents of consideration to retain a child at the earliest possible time. The parents of the child being considered for retention will be given an opportunity for a personal conference with the teacher and building leader before any final decision is made. All communication shall be in writing. Unless otherwise stipulated, a student who is retained will have a different teacher. It is the policy of the Broadalbin-Perth Elementary School to assign a student to the next grade even though the student has failed to make satisfactory progress when, 1.) the student has previously been retained in the same grade OR 2.) when the student is two years beyond the normal age range for the grade. Middle School Grade Level Assignment The objective of decisions on promotion and retention is to place students at the most appropriate level of instruction to enable future progress and success. A student who does not pass courses as noted below will have their record reviewed by staff including teachers, school counselors, and administrators. The review will take into consideration the following factors: age, previous retention(s), availability of summer school courses, availability of appropriate courses at the next grade level, social development, and potential to make appropriate progress. The final decision for grade placement will be made by the Middle School building leader. A plan must be developed and implemented to ensure that appropriate supports are provided to the student, which may include a recommendation for summer school. Parents may request a meeting with the building leader to discuss the decision. In order to be promoted to 7th, 8th or 9th grade, a student must: Pass at least three of the core subjects (English, mathematics, science, social studies) two of which being English and mathematics AND at a minimum pass one and a half units of the various exploratory and other required courses. A student who was not successful in passing a core course(s) may be promoted provided they successfully complete the appropriate summer school course, if offered. It is the policy of the Broadalbin-Perth Middle School to assign a student to the next grade even though the student has failed to make satisfactory progress when either the student has previously been retained in the same grade OR when the student is two years beyond the normal age for the grade. Exceptions to this policy will be made only in the case of a student with a documented disability thus precluding the possibility of attaining these prescribed requirements. Only the building leader of CSE may authorize such a waiver. High School Grade Level Assignment For organizational purposes, class activities and to mark progress toward meeting graduation requirements, students are assigned to one of four high school grade levels. All students are required to take a minimum of five credits per year and physical education; six credits per year and physical education is preferred. Grade 9 to Grade 10 - must have successfully completed five (5) units of study and one full year of high school Grade 10 to Grade 11 - must have successfully completed ten and a half (10.5) units of study and two years of high school Grade 11 to Grade 12 - must have successfully completed sixteen (16) units of study, attended three years of high school, and be a candidate for graduation. Testing Program The District utilizes various ability, achievement, diagnostic, readiness, interest, and guidance tests for the purpose of complying with state and federal law and/or aiding the implementation of quality educational services. The District will not make any student promotion or placement decisions based solely or primarily on student performance on the state administered English language arts and mathematics assessments for grades 3 through 8. The District may, however, consider student performance on state assessments in making student promotion and placement decisions provided that multiple measures be used in addition to these assessments and that these assessments do not constitute the major factor in these determinations. Alternative Testing Procedures The use of alternative testing procedures will be limited to: Students identified by the Committee on Special Education and/or Section 504 Team as having a disability. Alternative testing procedures will be specified in a student’s Individualized Education Program or Section 504 Accommodation Plan; and Students whose native language is other than English (i.e., English language learners) in accordance with State Education Department (SED) Guidelines. The alternative testing procedures employed will be based upon a student’s individual needs and the type of test administered. The District will report the use of alternative testing procedures to the SED on a form and at a time prescribed by the Commissioner. Reporting to Parents or Persons in Parental Relation to Students Parents or persons in parental relation to District students will receive an appropriate report of student progress at regular intervals. The District will not place or include on a student’s official transcript or maintain in a student’s permanent record any individual student score on a state administered standardized English language arts or mathematics assessment for grades 3 through 8. However, the District will comply with state and federal requirements regarding the maintenance and transfer of student test scores. Any test results on a state administered standardized English language arts, mathematics or science assessment for grades 3 through 8 sent to parents or persons in parental relation to a student will include a clear and conspicuous notice that these results will not be included on the student’s official transcript or in the student’s permanent record and are being provided to the student and parents for diagnostic purposes. When necessary, attempts will be made to provide interpreters for non-English speaking parents and/or persons in parental relation to District students. References § 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 USC § 794 et seq. Education Law §§ 305(45) – (47), 1709(3) 8 NYCRR §§ 100.2(g), 100.2(ll), 100.3(b)(2)(iv), 100.4(b)(2)(v), 100.4(e)(6) 8 NYCRR Parts 117 and 154
