7211 – Provision of Interpreter Services to Parents Who are Hearing Impaired

7211 – Provision of Interpreter Services to Parents Who are Hearing Impaired Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 7211 – Provision of Interpreter Services to Parents Who are Hearing Impaired March 18 , 2024 The Board of Education assures parents or persons in parental relation who are hearing impaired the right to meaningful access to school initiated meetings or activities pertaining to the academic and/or disciplinary aspects of their children's education. School initiated meetings or activities are defined to include, but are not limited to, parent-teacher conferences, child study or building-level team meetings, planning meetings with school counselors regarding educational progress and career planning, suspension hearings or any conferences with school officials relating to disciplinary actions. The term "hearing impaired" shall include any hearing impairment, whether permanent or fluctuating, which prevents meaningful participation in School District meetings or activities. *Parents or persons in parental relation shall be notified of the availability of interpreter services to be provided at no charge, provided that a written request is made to the School District within fourteen (14) days of the scheduled event. Exceptions to the time frame request may be made for unanticipated circumstances as determined by the Principal/designee. The District shall also notify appropriate school personnel as to the terms and implementation of this policy. If interpreter services are requested, the District shall appoint an interpreter for the hearing impaired to interpret during the meeting or activity. The District will arrange for interpreters through a District-created list or through an interpreter referral service. The District shall also develop interagency agreements, as appropriate, to ensure that sign language interpreters are provided for eligible parents or persons in parental relation when District students attend out-of-District schools or programs. In the event that an interpreter is unavailable, the School District shall make other reasonable accommodations which are satisfactory to the parents or persons in parental relation. Examples of what constitutes reasonable accommodations in the event an interpreter cannot be located may include, but are not limited to, the use of: Written communications, transcripts, note takers, etc.; and Technology, such as: a decoder or telecommunication device for the deaf, assistive listening devices, and closed or open captioning. References Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. §§12131-12134 Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. §794 Education Law §3230 8 NYCRR §100.2(aa) Rothschild v. Grottenthaler , 907 F.2d 286 (2d Cir. 1990)
