7420 – Sports and the Athletic Program

7420 – Sports and the Athletic Program Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 7420 – Sports and the Athletic Program September 16 , 2019 General Principles and Eligibility Athletics are an integral part of a well-balanced educational program. The Broadalbin-Perth Central School District’s (the District) interscholastic athletic program will conform with the Commissioner’s regulations, as well as the established rules of the New York State Public High School Athletic Association (NYSPHSAA), National Federation of State High School Associations (NFHS) and the State Education Department. Athletic eligibility requires that the student: Provide written parental or guardian consent. The consent form must contain information regarding mild traumatic brain injuries (concussions) as specified in the Commissioner’s regulations. The District will provide and require every athlete to complete a health history form for each season of participation. Obtain medical clearance from the school physician or nurse practitioner or the student’s personal physician. The school physician or nurse practitioner retains final approval of any physicals performed by a student’s personal physician. We will offer a minimum of three (3) no cost opportunities for physicals by the school physician. Meet the requirements for interscholastic competition as set forth by the Commissioner’s regulations and the NYSPHSAA and NFHS. Comply with all District rules, codes, and standards applicable to athletic participation. Title IX Compliance The Board supports equal athletic opportunities for members of both sexes through interscholastic and intramural activities. To ensure equal athletic opportunities for its students, the District will consider: Its accommodation of athletic interests and abilities (the nature and extent of sports offered, including levels of competition, team competition, and team performance); Equipment and supplies; Scheduling of games and practice time; Travel costs and opportunities for travel; Assignment and compensation of coaches; Locker rooms, practice, and competitive facilities; Available medical and training facilities and services; and The nature and extent of support, publicity, and promotion. The District may consider other pertinent factors as well. Each of the factors will be assessed by comparing availability, quality, type of benefits, kind of opportunities, and form of treatment. Identical benefits, opportunities, or treatment are not required. The District’s Civil Rights Compliance Officer will coordinate the District’s efforts to comply with and carry out its responsibilities under Title IX. This person will be appropriately trained and possess comprehensive knowledge about applicable federal and state laws, regulations, and policies. The District has a responsibility under Title IX to ensure that boys’ and girls’ programs are provided with equivalent benefits, treatment, services, and opportunities regardless of their source. When determining equivalency, therefore, benefits, services, and opportunities attained through private funds—including donations, fundraising, and booster clubs—must be considered in combination with all benefits, services, and opportunities. Athletic Placement Process for Interschool Athletic Programs (APP) The APP is a method for evaluating students who want to participate in sports at higher or lower levels, consistent with their physical and emotional maturity, size, fitness level, and skills. The Board approves the use of the APP for all secondary school interscholastic team members. The Superintendent will implement procedures for the APP, and will require the athletic director to maintain records of students who have successfully completed the APP. The APP process will be implemented and carried out using the NYSPHSAA guidelines. Student Athletic Injuries No injured student will be allowed to practice or play in an athletic contest. An appropriate medical professional should diagnose and treat an athlete’s injuries. The coach should ensure that any player injured while under his or her care receives prompt and appropriate medical attention, and that all of the medical professional’s treatment instructions are followed. The injured student has an obligation to promptly inform his or her coach of all injuries. No student will be allowed to practice or compete if there is a question whether he or she is in adequate physical condition. A physician’s certification may be required before an athlete is permitted to return to practice or competition. Athletic Program-Safety The District will take reasonable steps to minimize physical risks posed to students participating in the interscholastic athletic program by: Requiring timely medical examinations of participants before each season; Employing certified or licensed staff to coach all varsity, junior varsity, and modified practices and games; Providing or requiring certified or licensed officials to officiate all competitions; Ensuring that its players’ equipment is safe and operates within the applicable manufacturers’ guidelines; Ensuring that all home fields, courts, pools, tracks, and other areas where athletes practice, warm-up, or compete are safe and appropriate for use; and Providing professional development and training opportunities for all coaching staff. Pre-season; in-season and post-season meetings conducted by the Athletic Director. References Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, 20 USC § 1681 et seq. 45 CFR Part 86 8 NYCRR §§ 135 and 136 NOTE: Refer also to Policies: #6121 — Non-Discrimination and Anti-Harassment in the District #7522 — Concussion Management
