7560 – Notification of Sex Offenders

7560 – Notification of Sex Offenders Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 7560 – Notification of Sex Offenders June 22 , 2023 In accordance with the Sex Offender Registration Act (“Megan’s Law”), the Board of Education supports the New York State Department of Criminal Justice Services (DCJS) in its effort to inform the community in certain circumstances of the presence of individuals with a history of sex offenses, particularly against children, in the school locality. This policy is enacted in order to minimize the possibility that the sex offender will come in contact with school-age children, and to assist law enforcement agencies in preventing further criminal activity from occurring. Furthermore, the District shall cooperate with local police authorities and the local community in promoting and protecting the safety and well being of its students. It is the policy of the Board of Education to disseminate all information which the District receives from local police authorities in conjunction with Megan’s Law to designated staff members who might have possible contact with the offender during the course of their school duties including, but not limited to, Building Principals, supervisors, teachers, office personnel, coaches, custodians, bus drivers, and security personnel. The Superintendent reserves the right to automatically disseminate such information to additional members of the staff, designated supervisors of non-school groups that regularly use District facilities and have children in attendance, parents/guardians of District students, and other community residents who, in the opinion of the Superintendent, have an immediate need to be notified of such data in order to protect the safety of our students. All staff members shall be informed of the availability of the information received by the District pursuant to Megan’s Law upon written request to the applicable Building Principal/designee or supervisor. Community residents shall be notified of the availability of this information, with written requests directed to the District Office. Districts may also choose to provide information to community residents through a link on the District’s website to New York State’s online Sex Offender Registry. Staff members shall inform their immediate supervisor if they observe within the school building, on school grounds, at school activities, or at or near bus routes any individual whose description matches the information which was provided to the District by local law enforcement authorities. Such law enforcement officials will be notified of this information by the District as appropriate. Information that is disseminated to the School District pursuant to Megan’s Law may be disclosed or not disclosed by the District in its discretion. Any information which the School District receives regarding a sex offender from a source other than the Sex Offender Registry, and which is maintained independent of the requirements of Megan’s Law, will be available from the District, upon written request, in accordance with the requirements of the Freedom of Information Law (FOIL). Special Circumstances Whereby Sex Offenders May Enter Upon School Grounds As a mandatory condition of the sentence for sex offenders placed on probation or conditional discharge whose victim was under the age of eighteen (18) or who has been designated a Level 3 sex offender, the court requires that such sentenced offender refrain from knowingly entering into or upon school grounds or any other facility or institution primarily used for the care or treatment of persons under the age of eighteen (18) while one or more of such persons are present. However, by exception, a sex offender may enter school grounds or facility with the written authorization of his/her parole officer and the Superintendent for limited authorized purposes. Entrance upon the premises is subject to the following conditions: The offender is a registered student, participant or employee of the facility; The offender is an employee of an entity contracted by the facility; The offender has a family member enrolled in the facility; or If the school is the offender’s designated polling place and he/she enters solely to vote. Implementation Administrative regulations shall be developed to implement this policy. References Correction Law Article 6-C Executive Law 259-c(14) Penal Law 65.10(4-a) and 140.15 Public Officers Law Section 84 et seq.
