7610 – Special Education: District Plan

7610 – Special Education: District Plan Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 7610 – Special Education: District Plan June 22 , 2023 A District plan shall be developed describing the Special Education program in the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District. The District plan shall include the following: A description of the nature and scope of special education programs and services currently available to students (including preschool students) residing in the District, including but not limited to descriptions of the District’s resource room programs and each special class program provided by the District in terms of group size and composition. Identification of the number and age span of students (school age and preschool) to be served by type of disability and recommended setting. The method to be used to evaluate the extent to which the objectives of the program have been achieved. A description of the policies and practices of the Board of Education to ensure the allocation of appropriate space within the District for special education programs that meet the needs of students and preschool children with disabilities. A description of the policies and practices of the Board of Education to ensure that appropriate space will be continually available to meet the needs of resident students and preschool students with disabilities who attend special education programs provided by Boards of Cooperative Educational Services. A description of how the District intends to ensure that all instructional materials to be used in the schools of the District will be made available in a usable alternative format for each student with a disability at the same time as such instructional materials are available to non-disabled students. The alternative format must meet the National Instructional Materials Accessibility Standard defined in federal law. The estimated budget to support such plan. The date on which such plan was adopted by the Board of Education. A description of how the District plan is consistent with the special education space requirements plan for the region as developed by the Board of Cooperative Educational Services. The District plan, with personally identifiable student information deleted, shall be filed and available for public inspection and review by the Commissioner. References 20 USC Section 1474(e)(3)(B) 8 NYCRR Part 155 and Section 200.2(c)(1)
