7613 – The Role of the Board in Implementing a Student’s Individualized Education Program

7613 – The Role of the Board in Implementing a Student’s Individualized Education Program Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 7613 – The Role of the Board in Implementing a Student’s Individualized Education Program June 22 , 2023 The Board of Education shall establish at least one Committee on Special Education (CSE) and one Committee on Preschool Special Education (CPSE). The Board shall also establish, as necessary, Subcommittees on Special Education to ensure timely evaluation and placement of students with disabilities. Committee on Special Education The Board of Education shall, upon completion of its review of the recommendations of the CSE, arrange for the appropriate special education programs and services to be provided to a student with a disability. The Board shall notify the parent/guardian of its action in accordance with federal and state law and regulations. For a student not previously identified as having a disability, the CSE shall provide a recommendation to the Board which shall arrange for the appropriate special education programs and services to be provided within sixty (60) school days of the date of receipt of consent to evaluate. For a student with a disability referred for review, a recommendation shall be provided to the Board which shall arrange for the appropriate special education programs and services to be provided within sixty (60) school days of the referral for review. However, if such recommendation of the CSE is for placement in an approved in-state or out-of-state private school, the Board shall arrange for such special education programs and services for students with disabilities within thirty (30) school days of the Board’s receipt of the recommendation of the CSE. If on review of the recommendation of the CSE, the Board of Education disagrees with such recommendation, the Board shall follow one of the following procedures: The Board may remand the recommendation to the CSE with a statement of the Board’s objections or concerns and a request that a timely meeting be held to review and consider such objections or concerns. The CSE shall consider the Board’s objections or concerns, revise the individualized education program (IEP) where appropriate, and resubmit a recommendation to the Board. If the Board continues to disagree with the recommendation of the CSE, the Board may continue to remand the recommendation to the original committee for additional reviews of its objections or concerns, or establish a second CSE to develop a new recommendation in accordance with the following paragraph, provided that the Board arranges for the programs and services in accordance with the student’s IEP within the timelines as outlined above; or, in the alternative, The Board may establish a second CSE to develop a new recommendation for the student. If the Board disagrees with such new recommendation, the Board may remand the recommendation to the second CSE with a statement of the Board’s objections or concerns and a request that a timely meeting be held to review and consider such objections or concerns. The second CSE shall consider the Board’s objections or concerns, revise the IEP where appropriate, and resubmit a recommendation to the Board. If the Board continues to disagree with the recommendation of the second CSE, the Board may continue to remand the recommendation for additional reviews of its objections or concerns by the second CSE, provided that the Board arranges for the programs and services in accordance with the student’s IEP, as developed by the second CSE, within the timelines as outlined above. Pursuant to Commissioner’s Regulations, the Board may not select the recommendation of the original CSE once it has established a second CSE. The Board shall provide the student’s parents/guardians with written notice and a copy of the statement of its objections or concerns and notice of due process rights in accordance with Section 200.5 of the Regulations of the Commissioner. Committee on Preschool Special Education Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Committee on Preschool Special Education (CPSE), the Board of Education shall arrange for the preschool student with a disability to receive such appropriate programs and services in accordance with the student’s IEP, commencing with the July, September or January starting date for the approved program, unless such services are recommended by the CPSE less than thirty (30) school days prior to, or after, the appropriate starting date selected for the preschool student with a disability; in that case, such services shall be provided no later than thirty (30) days from the recommendation of the CPSE. If the Board disagrees with the recommendation of the CPSE, the Board shall send the recommendation back to the CPSE with notice of the need to schedule a timely meeting to review the Board’s concerns and to revise the IEP as deemed appropriate. The Board of Education shall provide such notice as required by federal and state law and regulations. Subcommittee on Special Education The number of Subcommittees on Special Education will be determined by the CSE and the CSE will be responsible for the oversight and monitoring of the activities of each subcommittee to assure compliance with the requirements of applicable state and federal laws and regulations. Each Subcommittee may perform the functions for which the CSE is responsible, except: When a student is considered for initial placement in a special class; or When a student is considered for initial placement in a special class outside of the student’s school of attendance; or When a student is considered for placements in a school primarily serving students with disabilities or a school outside the District. Subcommittees shall report annually to the CSE regarding the status of each student with a disability within its jurisdiction. Upon receipt of a written request from the parent or person in parental relation to a student, the Subcommittee shall refer to the CSE any matter in which the parent disagrees with the Subcommittee’s recommendation concerning a modification or change in the identification, evaluation, educational placement or provision of a free appropriate education to the student. References Education Law Sections 4402 and 4410 8 NYCRR Sections 200.2(d)(1), 200.4(c), 200.4(d), 200.5 and 200.16(e) NOTE: Refer also to Policy #7630 — Committee on Special Education (CSE)/Committee on Preschool Special Education (CPSE)
