7691 – Extreme Heat Condition Days

7691 – Extreme Heat Condition Days Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 7691 – Extreme Heat Condition Days April 10 , 2025 As required by Education Law section 409-n, the Board of Education adopts this policy to address the health and safety of students and employees on extreme heat condition days. "Extreme heat condition days" are defined by law as when occupiable educational and support services spaces are eighty-two degrees Fahrenheit or higher. Under the law, "support services spaces" do not include kitchen areas used in the preparation of food for consumption by students. The law requires room temperature to be measured at a shaded location, three feet above the floor near the center of the room. Air conditioners, where available, may also be used to keep temperatures from reaching eighty-two degrees, or to lower the temperature once it does. Evaporative cooling techniques may be feasible in some situations. On days when the outside temperature is expected to reach at least eighty-five degrees, the district may take the actions listed above earlier in the day or before school starts, when the temperature is lower. The Superintendent and Director of Facilities will develop strategies to cool the district's occupiable educational and support services spaces during the day. The district will also remind students and their families to dress appropriately for the weather. This policy does not preclude air conditioning from being used pursuant to an Individualized Education Program, Section 504 Plan, or documented medical needs. Actions to be taken at Eighty-Eight Degrees Students and staff will be removed from educational and support services spaces when the temperature reaches eighty-eight degrees Fahrenheit, when practicable. The Superintendent will direct Building Principals to evacuate the space, including but not limited to the following: Move students and staff to cooler locations; or Close school early and send students and staff home according to the district's early closing protocols. Closing school entirely for the day increases the possibility of not attaining 180 school days in a given year as required by Education Law §§3204 and 3604 (for purposes of state aid). Unused snow days, if available, could make up for these high heat days, if compatible with collective bargaining agreements. Education Law §3604(7) allows an exception of up to five days for "extraordinarily adverse weather conditions" and "a credible threat to student safety as reasonably determined by a lead school official," where the district cannot make up such days by using vacation days. References: Policy 4765 – Online, Distance, and Remote Learning Education Law §§409-n; 2801-a
