8110 – Curriculum Management

8110 – Curriculum Management Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 8110 – Curriculum Management October 20 , 2025 The Board of Education recognizes the importance of maintaining an effective educational program in the district’s schools. To this end, the Board is committed to establishing and maintaining a coordinated curriculum management process that: Defines how the district’s curriculum is developed and approved. Ensures that the curriculum is taught and assessed. Provides for the ongoing review and evaluation of the curriculum. For purposes of this policy, “curriculum” means a series of planned instruction that is coordinated, articulated and implemented to result in achievement of specific knowledge and skills, and application of such knowledge and skills by all students. Curriculum Development The Board views a centralized curriculum articulated among and between grade levels as essential to an effective instructional program designed to meet the learning standards established by the state and the Board. The Superintendent of Schools shall be responsible for the development of a written curriculum designed to meet data driven student needs. The curriculum will be flexible and will be continually reviewed and evaluated in reference to the changing needs of the students and educational practices. The Superintendent shall establish procedures for curriculum development that provides for the effective participation of administrators, teaching staff, students, parents, other community members and members of the Board. The curriculum shall: Comply with state mandates regarding course offerings and essential knowledge and skills. Focus on the content standards of each discipline and ensure that what students learn is rigorous, challenging and represents the most important learning for students. Provide sufficient flexibility to meet individual student needs at each stage of development. Reflect current research, best practices and technological advancements within each discipline. Promote congruence among the written, taught and assessed content. Curriculum Adoption The Superintendent shall present the written curriculum to the Board for its review and adoption. The Board has the authority under Education Law to adopt or reject the Superintendent’s proposal, or to return it for further study and revision. Curriculum Implementation Implementation of the curriculum rests primarily with the teaching staff. In carrying out this responsibility, the teaching staff shall work to ensure continuity between the written, taught and assessed curriculum. The Building Principal shall be responsible for the management of the implementation of the aligned curriculum at the building level. The Building Principal shall carry out this management function through activities including analyzing student assessment data; making classroom observations of teachers; and providing opportunities for teachers to discuss and share ideas and strategies. The district’s curriculum for each subject or course shall be communicated in a written curriculum map reviewed by the Superintendent and developed and annually updated by the District Leadership Team and faculty. Such maps will provide the necessary information to direct instruction and ensure continuity among and between grade levels. The maps shall also include a description of the essential knowledge and skills for the course, instructional philosophy, appropriate sequence, and correlation of major resources. Curriculum maps shall be made available to parents and community members upon request to promote understanding of district goals and objectives. Curriculum Review The Board recognizes the need for and the value of a systematic, ongoing curriculum evaluation that includes collecting and analyzing data about student performance. All aspects of the curriculum shall be subjected to a critical analysis in an attempt to improve students’ learning and growth. This review process is essential to evaluate program effectiveness in each content area and to make judgments about resource allocation. The Superintendent shall develop guidelines to evaluate the curriculum to ensure its continued effectiveness. The Superintendent shall report the findings regarding the effectiveness of the instructional program to the Board periodically, and, if necessary, shall recommend changes to the district’s curriculum. References • Education Law 1709(3); 1711(2)
