8130 – Equal Educational Opportunities

8130 – Equal Educational Opportunities Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 8130 – Equal Educational Opportunities May 16 , 2016 The Broadalbin-Perth Central School District provides equal opportunity for students and does not discriminate against any student enrolled in (or any candidate for admission to) its programs and activities on the basis of actual or perceived race, color, national origin, sex, disability, or age. Further, the District does not discriminate on the basis of weight, ethnic group, religion, religious practice, sexual orientation, gender, or any other basis prohibited by state or federal non-discrimination laws, and provides equal access to its facilities to the Boy Scouts and other designated youth groups as per facility usage protocol as outlined in Policy 3280 Community Use of School Facilities. Educational Services for Married/Pregnant Students Public schools may not discriminate against students based on their parental and/or marital status. The opportunity to participate in all of the services, programs, and activities of the school district shall not be restricted or denied because of pregnancy, parenthood, or marriage. Pregnant students shall be encouraged to remain and participate in District programs. The forms of instruction provided to such students may include any or all of the following: Remain in school with provisions for special instruction, scheduling, and counseling as needed; Receive home instruction; Attend BOCES programs. In this regard, the Superintendent or his/her designee, in consultation with student services staff, the school physician, the student’s personal physician and parent/legal guardian, may make program modifications which are feasible and necessary to accommodate the special needs of such students. Investigation of Complaints and Grievances The School District will act to promptly, thoroughly, and equitably investigate all complaints, whether verbal or written, of discrimination and will promptly take appropriate action to protect individuals from further discrimination. All such complaints will be handled in a manner consistent with the District’s policies, procedures, and/or regulations regarding the investigation of discrimination and harassment complaints, including Policy #3420 — Non-Discrimination and Anti-Harassment in the School District; Policy #7551 — Sexual Harassment of Students; and Administrative Regulation #3420R — Non-Discrimination and Anti-Harassment in the School District. Additional information regarding the District’s discrimination and harassment complaint and grievance procedures, including but not limited to the designation of the Civil Rights Compliance Officer, knowingly making false accusations, and possible corrective actions, can be found in Policy #3420 — Non-Discrimination and Anti-Harassment in the School District and Administrative Regulation #3420R — Non-Discrimination and Anti-Harassment in the School District. Prohibition of Retaliatory Behavior The Board prohibits any retaliatory behavior directed against complainants, victims, witnesses, and/or any other individuals who participated in the investigation of a complaint of discrimination. Complaints of retaliation may be directed to the Civil Rights Compliance Officer. In the event the Civil Rights Compliance Officer is the alleged offender, the report will be directed to another Civil Rights Compliance Officer, if the District has designated another individual to serve in such a capacity, or to the Superintendent. Where appropriate, follow-up inquiries will be made to ensure that discrimination has not resumed and that all those involved in the investigation of the discrimination have not suffered retaliation. References Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 USC § 12101 et seq. § 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 USC § 794 et seq. Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 USC § 2000d et seq. Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, 20 USC § 1681 et seq. 20 USC § 1701, et seq. 45 CFR § 84.40
