8210 – Safety Conditions and Programs

8210 – Safety Conditions and Programs Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 8210 – Safety Conditions and Programs June 23 , 2023 The practice of safety will be considered an integral part of the instructional program through fire prevention, emergency procedures and drills, driver education, and traffic and pedestrian safety. Each Principal will be responsible for the supervision of a safety program for his/her school. The safety program may include, but not be limited to, in-service training, plant inspection, fire prevention, accident recordkeeping, driver and vehicle safety programs, emergency procedures and drills, and traffic safety programs relevant to students, employees and the community. It shall be the duty of the Board of Education to provide inspections and supervision of the health and safety aspects of the school facilities. Eye Safety/Student Use of Hand-Held Laser Pointers Eye safety devices are to be provided by the School District for the protection of employees, students and visitors, and worn in the technology education classes and labs when activities present a potential eye hazard. The Superintendent or his/her designee will ensure that these devices are properly repaired, cleaned and stored to prevent the spread of germs or diseases after individuals use them. Each classroom teacher is responsible for the safe and proper use of all instructional materials and equipment by students in his/her classroom. Laser pointers are to be used by students only when such use is approved and supervised by the classroom instructor. Students will be advised not to stare directly into the beam from a laser pointer or direct the beam at the eyes of another individual. Students are not to aim the pointer into the audience. Students are to be made aware of the hazards associated with the particular type of laser pointer used. References Education Law Sections 409, 409-a, 807-a and 906 8 NYCRR Part 136 and Section 141.10
