8211 – Prevention Instruction

8211 – Prevention Instruction Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 8211 – Prevention Instruction June 23 , 2023 Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) Instruction in Health Education The Board of Education shall provide a health education program that will include appropriate instruction for all students concerning Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). Accurate information concerning the nature of the disease, methods of transmission, and means of prevention shall be provided in an age-appropriate manner and shall be consistent with community values and will stress that abstinence is the most appropriate and effective premarital protection against AIDS. A representative community advisory group consisting of appropriate school personnel, School Board members, parents, religious representatives, and other community members shall be established in order to make recommendations for curriculum content, implementation, and evaluation of an AIDS instructional program. Appropriate training will be provided for instructional staff. No student shall be required to receive instruction concerning the methods of prevention of AIDS if the parent or legal guardian has filed with the Principal a written request that the student not participate in such instruction, with an assurance that the student will receive this instruction at home. AIDS instruction in the elementary grades shall be taught by the regular classroom teachers, while such instruction in the middle and high school grades shall be a part of the required health education curriculum. Hands-Only Cardio Pulmonary Resuscitation and Automated External Defibrillator Instruction High school students will be provided instruction in hands-only cardiopulmonary resuscitation and the use of an automated external defibrillator. Standards for this instruction will be based on a nationally recognized instructional program that utilizes the most current guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care issued by the American Heart Association or a substantially equivalent organization, that are consistent with the requirements of the programs adopted by the American Heart Association or the American Red Cross, and that will incorporate instruction designed to: Recognize the signs of a possible cardiac arrest and to call 911; Provide an opportunity to demonstrate the psychomotor skills necessary to perform hands-only compression cardiopulmonary resuscitation; and Provide awareness in the use of an automated external defibrillator. The Committee on Special Education or a Multidisciplinary Team, in accordance with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, may determine, on an individual student basis, if a student with a disability should be excused from the requirement for instruction in hands-only CPR and the use of AEDs. Substance Abuse – Prevention Instruction The Board of Education recognizes the need to educate students on the hazards of alcohol, tobacco and/or drug abuse. An educationally sequential health prevention program, utilizing as appropriate community, staff and student input, will be developed to inform students of: Causes for substance abuse; Physical and psychological damage associated with substance abuse; Avoidance of alcohol, tobacco and drugs; Dangers of driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. Environmental Conservation Instruction The Board of Education supports and encourages the development of a District-wide, articulated curriculum of environmental conservation integrated into other program disciplines. Fire and Arson Prevention/Injury Prevention/Life Safety Education The Board of Education directs the administration to provide instruction in fire and arson prevention, injury prevention and life safety education relating to protection against injury or death and property loss or damage as a result of criminally initiated or other preventable fire. Such instruction shall include materials to educate children on the dangers of falsely reporting a criminal incident, an impending explosion or fire emergency involving danger to life or property, an impending catastrophe, or a life safety emergency. The Board of Education directs the administration to provide such instruction for all students for a period of not less than forty-five (45) minutes in each month that school is in session. Student Safety Instruction in courses in technology education, science, home and career skills, health and safety, physical education, and art shall include and emphasize safety and accident prevention. Safety instruction shall precede the use of materials and equipment by students in applicable units of work in the courses listed above, and instructors shall teach and enforce all safety procedures relating to the particular courses. These shall include the wearing of protective eye devices in appropriate activities. Emergency Planning The School District shall maintain updated plans and operating procedures to be followed in the event of natural or manmade disasters or enemy attack. Students shall be provided instruction to respond effectively in emergency situations. Instruction on Prevention of Child Abduction All students in grades K through 8 in District schools shall receive instruction designed to prevent the abduction of children. Such instruction shall be provided by or under the direct supervision of regular classroom teachers and the Board of Education shall provide appropriate training and curriculum materials for the regular classroom teachers who provide such instruction. However, at the Board’s discretion, such instruction may be provided by any other public or private agency. The Commissioner of Education will provide technical assistance to assist in the development of curricula for such courses of study which must be age appropriate and developed according to the needs and abilities of students at successive grade levels in order to provide awareness skills, information, self-confidence, and support to aid in the prevention of child abduction. For purposes of developing such courses of study, the Board of Education may establish local advisory councils or utilize the school-based shared decision making and planning committee established pursuant to the Regulations of the Commissioner to make recommendations concerning the content and implementation of such courses. Alternatively, the District may utilize courses of instruction developed by consortia of school districts, boards of cooperative educational services, other school districts, or any other public or private agency. Such advisory council shall consist of, but not be limited to, parents, school trustees and Board members, appropriate school personnel, business and community representatives, and law enforcement personnel having experience in the prevention of child abduction. Instruction on Child Development and Parenting Skills Instruction regarding child development and parenting skills may be offered by the District. The curriculum shall include instruction on the consequences and prevention of shaken baby syndrome, which may include the viewing of a video presentation for students in secondary schools. References AIDS Instruction 8 NYCRR Sections 135.3(b)(2) and 135.3(c)(2) Automated External Defibrillators Education Law Section 804-d Civil Preparedness New York State Office of Disaster Preparedness Fire and Arson/Injury Prevention/Life Safety Education Law Section 808 8 NYCRR Section 100.2(c)(5) Prevention of Child Abduction Education Law Section 803-a Student Safety Education Law Section 808 8 NYCRR Sections 107 and 155 Substance Abuse Education Law Section 804 8 NYCRR Section 135.3(a) Instruction on Child Development and Parenting Skills Education Law Section 804 NOTE: Refer also to Policies: #3410 — Code of Conduct on School Property #7320 — Alcohol, Tobacco, Drugs and Other Substances District Code of Conduct
