8220 – Career and Technical (Occupational) Education

8220 – Career and Technical (Occupational) Education Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 8220 – Career and Technical (Occupational) Education June 23 , 2023 The Board of Education recognizes the need for career and technical education and reaffirms its policy of strengthening the local high school career and technical education program through utilization of any available federal and state funds for that purpose and of supporting the BOCES program. Equal Opportunity The Board of Education prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex, sexual orientation, race, color, creed, religion, national origin, political affiliation, age, marital status, military status, disability or use of a service animal in any career and technical education program or activity of this District. The career and technical education program and/or activities shall be readily accessible to students with disabilities. Public Notification Prior to the beginning of each school year or academic semester, the District shall issue an appropriate public announcement which advises students, parents, employees and the general public that career and technical education opportunities will be offered without regard to sex, sexual orientation, race, color, creed, religion, national origin, political affiliation, age, marital status, military status, disability or use of a service animal. Included in such announcement will be the name, address, and telephone number of the person designated to coordinate Title IX/Section 504/ADA activities. Grievance Procedure Grievance procedures for resolving complaints regarding discrimination shall be disseminated to adequately inform students, parents and employees of the existence of these procedures. Local Advisory Council In accordance with Education Law, the Board will appoint a Local Advisory Council for Career Education. The Board may, with BOCES approval, utilize the BOCES Advisory Council as its Local Advisory Council. References Civil Rights Law Section 40-c Education Law Article 93 Executive Law Section 290 et seq. 8 NYCRR Sections 100.2(h) and 141 et seq.
