8240 – Instructional Programs: Driver Education, Gifted and Talented Education and Physical Education

8240 – Instructional Programs: Driver Education, Gifted and Talented Education and Physical Education Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 8240 – Instructional Programs: Driver Education, Gifted and Talented Education and Physical Education June 23 , 2023 Driver Education A driver education course may be offered under the conditions set forth by the New York State Education Department and Commissioner’s Regulations. Gifted and Talented Students The Board of Education will provide appropriate educational programs for students identified as being gifted and talented. Physical Education Class All students, except those with medical excuses, shall participate in physical education in accordance with the Commissioner’s Regulations, which require that all students attend and participate in physical education as follows: All students in grades K through 3 shall participate in a daily program for a minimum of 120 minutes per week. All students in grades 4 through 6 shall participate in a program three (3) times per week for a minimum of 120 minutes per week. The minimum time devoted to such programs (K through 6) shall be at least 120 minutes in each calendar week, exclusive of any time that may be required for dressing and showering. Students in grades 5 through 6 that are in a middle school shall participate in the physical education program a minimum of three (3) periods per calendar week during one (1) semester of each school year and two (2) periods during the other semester, or a comparable time each semester if the school is organized in other patterns. All secondary students (in grades 7 through 12) shall have the opportunity for regular physical education, but not less than three (3) times per week in one (1) semester and two (2) times per week in the other semester. For students in grades 10 through 12 only, a comparable time each semester shall be provided if the school is organized in other patterns or if students have demonstrated acceptable levels of physical fitness, physical skills and knowledge of physical education activities in extra class programs or out-of-school activities approved by the physical education staff and the School Administration. For grades K through 12, a district may provide an equivalent program as approved by the Commissioner of Education. An excuse from physical education class may be accepted from a licensed physician for medical reasons or a licensed chiropractor for conditions of the spine. Any student whose condition precludes participation in a regular program shall be provided with adaptive physical education approved by the Commissioner of Education. References Education Law Section 806-a 8 NYCRR Section 107.2 Education Law Article 90 and Section 3204(2)(b) 8 NYCRR Section 142 Education Law Sections 803 and 3204 8 NYCRR Section 135.4
