8251 – Therapy Dogs in the School

8251 – Therapy Dogs in the School Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 8251 – Therapy Dogs in the School September 18 , 2023 The Broadalbin-Perth Central School District supports the use of Therapy Dogs by qualified school personnel, or qualified volunteers (the Owner) for the benefit of its students, subject to the conditions of this policy. Therapy dogs should be supported by school counselors, school social workers, and school psychologists if they are going to be used on a regular basis. Advanced notice and authorization must be granted by the superintendent or designee to permit therapy dogs within a school facility by school personnel or outside persons. A Therapy Dog is a dog that has been individually trained and certified to work with its owner to provide emotional support, well-being, comfort or companionship to school district students. Therapy dogs are not service dogs as described by the Americans with Disabilities Act. Nothing herein shall enlarge or abridge the right of any student, employee or visitor to be accompanied on district property by their own service dog, to the extent required by federal or state law. Nothing herein shall permit a student, employee or visitor to be accompanied by their own comfort animal or emotional support animal for their own use or individual benefit on District property. Therapy Dogs are personal property of the teacher or employee and are not owned by the school district. The Building Principal shall notify parents and staff on an annual basis regarding the presence of therapy dogs in the school building. Therapy Dog Standards and Procedures The following requirements must be satisfied before a therapy dog will be allowed in school buildings or on school grounds: Requests All individuals who wish to bring a therapy dog to school must submit a written application to the Superintendent of schools or his/her designee. That application will be reviewed by the Superintendent of schools or his/her designee. The request must be renewed each school year or whenever a different therapy dog will be used. A copy of the application is attached. Training and Certification The Owner must submit a Therapy Dogs International certificate, or a comparable authority as determined by the District. The certification must remain current at all times that the therapy dog is present in any district school buildings. Health and Vaccination The therapy dog must be clean, well groomed, in good health, housebroken, and immunized against diseases common to dogs. The owner must submit proof of current licensure from the local licensing authority and proof of the therapy dog’s current vaccinations and immunizations from a licensed veterinarian. Control Unless the use of a leash or other tether would interfere with the therapy dog’s safe, effective performance of its work or tasks. Identification The therapy dog must have appropriate identification clearly indicating that it is a therapy dog (vest, bandana, tag). No Disruption The therapy dog must not disrupt the educational process by barking, seeking attention, or engaging in any other disruptive behavior. Supervision and Care of Therapy Dogs The owner is solely responsible for the supervision and care of the therapy dog, including any feeding, exercising, and clean-up while the animal is in a school building or on school property. The school district is not responsible for providing any care, supervision, or assistance for a therapy dog. Insurance Therapy Dogs are personal property of the teacher or employee and are not owned by the school district. The owner must submit a copy of an insurance policy that provides liability coverage for the therapy dog while on school property. If the certification is through Therapy Dog International, that meets this requirement. With a valid certificate and while "working" at the school under the owner's supervision, the district's liability insurance shall serve as secondary coverage. Health and Safety The therapy dog must not pose a health and safety risk to any student, employee, or other person at school. Damages to School Property and Injuries The owner of a therapy dog is solely responsible and liable for any damage to school property or injury to personnel, students, or others caused by the therapy dog. Exclusion or Removal from School A therapy dog may be excluded from school property and buildings if a school administrator determines that: A handler does not have control of the therapy dog; The therapy dog is not housebroken; The therapy dog presents a direct and immediate threat to others in the school; or The animal’s presence otherwise interferes with the educational process. The owner shall be required to remove the therapy dog from school premises immediately upon such a determination. Allergic Reactions If any student or school employee assigned to a classroom in which a therapy dog is permitted suffers an allergic reaction to the therapy dog, the Owner of the animal will be required to remove the animal to a different location.
