8320 – Selection of Library and Multimedia Materials

8320 – Selection of Library and Multimedia Materials Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 8320 – Selection of Library and Multimedia Materials June 23 , 2023 A school library/library media center shall be established and maintained in each school district. The library in each elementary and secondary school shall meet the needs of the pupils, and shall provide an adequate complement to the instructional program in the various areas of the curriculum. Each school district shall also employ a certified school Library Media Specialist, unless equivalent service is provided by an alternative arrangement approved by the Commissioner. The Board of Education agrees that the responsibility of the school library is: To provide materials that will enrich and support the curriculum, taking into consideration the varied interests, abilities and maturity levels of the students served. To provide materials that will stimulate growth in factual knowledge, literary appreciation, aesthetic values and ethical standards. To provide a background of information that will enable students to make intelligent judgments in their daily lives. To provide materials on opposing sides of controversial issues so that young citizens may develop, under guidance, the practice of critical reading and thinking. To provide materials representative of the many religious, ethnic, and cultural groups and their contribution to our American heritage. To place principle above personal opinion and reason above prejudice in the selection of materials of the highest quality in order to assure a comprehensive collection appropriate for the users of the library. In interpreting these principles, the following will apply: Broad and varied collections will be developed systematically by the Library Media Specialist, based on recommendations of the professional staff and suggestions of students and parents. Final approval will be made by the Building Principal. Qualitative standards of selection involving factual accuracy, authoritativeness, artistic quality and appeal will be applied by Library Media Specialists before purchases are made. Materials will not be excluded because of the race, nationality, political opinions or religious views of the author. Materials will be continuously re-evaluated in relation to changing curriculum and instructional needs. Worn out, out-dated materials will be discarded. References Education Law Section 207 8 NYCRR Sections 21.4, 91.1, 91.2
