8360 – Religious Expression in the Instructional Program

8360 – Religious Expression in the Instructional Program Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 8360 – Religious Expression in the Instructional Program June 23 , 2023 The Board of Education acknowledges the importance of religion to the understanding of society and the richness of the human experience. In approaching the teaching about religion in the school, the District will be guided by three concepts when making decisions about the appropriateness of activities for inclusion in the school program: the activity should have a secular purpose; the activity should neither advance nor inhibit religion; and the activity must not foster an excessive entanglement of “government” with religion. Nurturing the development of knowledge and respect for the rights of all cultural and religious groups is a continuing goal of the School District. Students, faculty and administration are reminded of the pluralism of religious beliefs and are urged to be conscious of and respect the sensitivity of others. Opportunities to learn about cultural and religious traditions should be provided within the framework of the curriculum. Information about religious and cultural holidays and traditions focusing on how and when they are celebrated, their origins and histories should be part of this instruction. This educational opportunity should be handled with great care, sensitivity and respect for the feelings and beliefs of individuals. An environment should be created and encouraged where students of various ethnic backgrounds feel comfortable in sharing comments about their religious and cultural traditions. No student should be singled out to share or participate in such discussions solely on the basis of that student’s identification with the cultural/religious heritage being addressed. A student’s preference not to share or participate in such discussions should be honored and respected without penalty. School Activities Related to Religious Holidays or Themes School activities related to the teaching about religious holidays or themes must be consistent with, representative of, and congruent with the District’s curriculum. In planning school activities related to the teaching about religious holidays or themes, special effort must be made to ensure that the activity is not devotional and that students of all faiths can join without feeling they are betraying their own beliefs. In planning school activities related to the teaching about religious holidays or themes, age appropriate activities are encouraged within the framework of the curriculum. Teaching about religious and cultural holidays may include such special activities as parties and special foods, if they reinforce educational goals. Symbols in the Schools The purpose of using religious symbols should be to teach about religious concepts and traditions, and to convey historical or cultural content, not to promote or celebrate religious concepts, events or holidays. Music in the Schools The purpose of using religious music should be to teach musical concepts, to convey historical and cultural content, or to create aesthetic experiences in a setting which emphasizes artistic expression and educational value, not to promote or to celebrate a religious faith. Curriculum Areas in Conflict with Religious Beliefs Students shall be given the option to be excused from participating in those parts of an activity, program, or area of instruction involving a religious theme which conflicts with their own religious beliefs or that of their parents/guardians in accordance with applicable law and regulations. Alternatives may be provided that are of comparable instructional value. Implementation Administrative regulations will be developed to implement the terms of this policy. Further, the District shall vigorously publicize and disseminate this policy and accompanying regulations in order to ensure community, faculty, student, and parental/guardian awareness. References United States Constitution, First Amendment Elementary and Secondary Education Act, as amended by the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001, Section 9524 Equal Access Act, 20 USC Sections 4071-4074 Education Law Sections 1609(9), 1609(10), 1709(1), 1709(3), 3204(5) and 3210 8 NYCRR Sections 16.2 and 109.2 NOTE: Refer also to Policies: #7460 — Constitutionally Protected Prayer in the Public Schools #8330 — Objection to Instructional Materials
