8470 – Home Instruction (Home Schooling)

8470 – Home Instruction (Home Schooling) Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds 8470 – Home Instruction (Home Schooling) December 21 , 2015 The Broadalbin-Perth Central School District will attempt to cooperate with parents who wish to provide home instruction for their children. The child who is educated at home should receive an education in a manner consistent with an educational plan and at least substantially equivalent to that given to students of like age and attainments in the local public schools. The required subjects should be taught in a competent, systematic, and sequential manner, specifically in relation to the required courses as enumerated in Commissioner’s Regulation Section 100.10. Primary responsibility for determining compliance with Commissioner’s Regulations addressing home instruction rests with the Superintendent of Schools of the school district in which a home-instructed student resides. Provision of Services to Home-Instructed Students They are not awarded a high school diploma. A high school diploma may only be awarded to a student enrolled in a registered secondary school who has completed all program requirements set by the Board of Regents, the school or the District. Extracurricular Participation: Students instructed at home are not eligible to participate in interscholastic sports. Commissioner’s Regulations mandate that only students enrolled in the public school are allowed to participate in interscholastic sports. Further, the District does not permit home-instructed students to participate in any extracurricular activities sponsored by the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District. Textbooks and Materials: The District shall not provide textbooks and other materials to home-instructed students. Academic Course Work: The Broadalbin-Perth Central School District will not provide academic instruction in any credit bearing New York State Education Department course with seat time required, i.e., Music, Band, Drama. Health Services: The District will not furnish health services. Remedial Programs: The District will not provide remedial programs. Career and Technical/Gifted Education: The District will not provide Occupational and Vocational Education programs (career and technical education) nor programs for the Gifted to home-instructed students. Special Education Services: Solely for the purpose of Education Law Section 3602-c, home-instructed students with disabilities are deemed to be students enrolled in and attending a nonpublic school, which enables them to receive special education services, as well as to be included for computation of state aid for such education by the District. The Committee on Special Education (CSE) will develop an Individualized Education Services Program (IESP) for the student. The IESP shall be developed in the same manner and with the same content as an IEP. The Board of Education will determine a location where special education services are to be provided to a home-instructed student. This location may, but is not required to be, in the student’s home. Use of School Facilities: Students instructed at home shall not be allowed to use school facilities, except as provided for community organizations in Policy #3280 — Use of School Facilities, Materials and Equipment. References Education Law Sections 3204, 3205, 3210(2), 3212(2), 3240-42, 3602-c, 3602-c(2-c), and 4402 8 NYCRR Sections 100.10, 135.4(c)(7)(ii)(b)(2) and 200.2(a)
