Student Use of Internet-Enabled Devices

Student Use of Internet-Enabled Devices Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to Pinterest Share to Email Print this page Post RSS Feeds Student Use of Internet-Enabled Devices July 28 , 2025 I. Statement of Policy In accordance with New York State Education Law §2803, the Broadalbin-Perth Central School District has adopted a policy prohibiting student use of internet-enabled devices during the school day on school grounds. This policy is intended to align with the requirements of the "Distraction-Free Schools" legislation. BP shall implement procedures for communication, storage, and allowable exceptions as outlined in the law. The Broadalbin-Perth Central School District is not responsible for the loss, theft, or damage of internet-enabled devices brought onto school grounds. II. Definitions Internet-Enabled Device - any smartphone, tablet, smartwatch, or other device capable of connecting to the internet and enabling the user to access content on the internet, including social media applications. School day - the entire instructional day, during all instructional and non-instructional time, including but not limited to homeroom periods, lunch, recess, study halls, and passing times. School grounds - in or on or within any building, structure, athletic playing field, playground, or land contained within the real property boundary line of a district elementary, intermediate, junior high, vocational, or high school, a charter school, or a board of cooperative educational services facility. III. Prohibition of Internet-Enabled Devices in School The use of Internet-enabled devices by students during the school day, anywhere on school grounds, is prohibited. IV. Exceptions This Policy is not violated when students are authorized to use an Internet Enabled Device in the following situation(s): The student has been authorized by a teacher, Building Principal, or the District to use an Internet-Enabled Device for educational purposes during instructional time; Where the use is necessary to manage the student's medical condition; In the event of an emergency, Where the use of an Internet-enabled device is part of the student's Individual Education Plan (IEP) or 504 Plan; or where it is needed for translation purposes. On a case-by-case basis, upon review and determination by a school psychologist, school social worker, or school counselor, for a student caregiver who is routinely responsible for the care and well-being of a family member or Where otherwise required by law. Students are authorized to have access to simple cell phones (i.e., phones without internet capability or access). Internet-enabled devices that have been provided to students for classroom instruction, such as laptops, tablets, or other devices used as part of instruction, are also authorized for students to access. V. Consequences for Violations of this Policy The consequences for violation(s) of this Policy will be consistent with the Code of Conduct. However, the suspension of a student is not permitted if the sole grounds for the suspension are that the student accessed an Internet-enabled device in violation of this Policy. VI. Contact During the School Day Parents/Persons in parental relation may contact their student(s) during the school day in the following manner: Contact the main office of the building in which your child attends. VII. Storing Students' Internet-Enabled Devices To comply with this policy, students' internet-enabled devices must be securely stored during the school day. Storage methods may vary by program and may include, but are not limited to: Individual student lockers Lockable storage pouches Designated locking storage units VIII. Implementation The District Superintendent or their designee shall develop any Regulations or internal procedures that may be necessary to implement this Policy. IX. Required Notifications A copy of this Policy shall be posted in a visible and accessible location on the BP website. BP shall provide a translation of this Policy upon request of a student or parent/person in parental relation in accordance with the law. Parents/Persons in Parental Relations will be notified in writing of the methods they can use to contact their student(s) during the school day, as outlined in Section VI of this Policy. This notification will occur at the beginning of each school year and upon enrollment. X. Annual Reporting On September 1, 2026, and every September 1 thereafter, the District shall publish an annual report on its website detailing the enforcement of this Policy during the preceding school year. This report must include: Non-identifiable demographic data of students who have faced disciplinary action for non-compliance with this Policy. An analysis of any demographic disparities in enforcement. If a statistically significant disparate enforcement impact is identified, such report shall include a mitigation action plan. Reference: NYS Education Law §2803
